An Architecture for Flexible Multi-Security Domain Networks
Tim Gibson, Ph.D. *
Lieutenant Colonel, U.S. Army
United States Pacific Command
Camp Smith, HI 96861
tgibson@acm.org
* The views expressed in this paper are those of the author, and are not
necessarily those of the United States, the Department of Defense, or the
United States Pacific Command. This paper has been reviewed and released
for publication by the Department of Defense Public Affairs Office, the
Pacific Command’s Public Affairs Office, and the Pacific Command’s
Computer Security Division.
Abstract – This paper briefly explains how the U.S. climate has changed dramatically from that of the Cold
military currently implements secure networks internally War. The lines between friend and foe have blurred and
and with multi-national alliance partners, the limitations can shift over time or over particular issues. While this
of the current implementations, and proposes an situation is complex enough for politicians and military
architecture to overcome these problems. The proposed commanders, it provides an entirely new level of
architecture provides a secure, environment that does not complexity for those who provide secure computer and
require all members to be treated as peers and allows communications systems.
different private communities. The proposed architecture Many of these new security challenges are only now
is not necessarily the only or the best architecture, but is a being grasped, and the complexities are far reaching. The
starting point for discussion and provides the research advent of electronic mail and the World-Wide–Web
and private computer communities with an insight into the (WWW) complicates matters even more. The United
military’s unique problems. Many of the concepts or States military takes Internet-based electronic mail, web-
requirements discussed in the paper can be directly browsing, and many other actions for granted. It is
applied to the commercial sector. extremely difficult to exchange classified email with
foreign countries using accredited and certified systems. It
is more problematic to provide web browsing capability
1. Introduction across security domains. The result is either separately
encrypted bilateral networks with each nation or a large
For the military, the post-Cold War era presents many multi-lateral peer network. Bilateral connections have a
different and complex problems that were unimagined high maintenance cost and reduce interoperability for
during the previous four decades. These problems apply to multi-lateral operations. Similarly, one large peer network
many facets of the military-industrial complex, including enhances interoperability, but the utility of a peer network
how to apply cryptography to meet the needs of the is reduced because all information is implicitly available
military commander in the post Cold War political to all network members—and not every network member
environment. Throughout the Cold War, there were clear wants to share information equally. These problems are
definitions of which countries were our friends and allies particularly vexing for the United States in the Pacific
and which countries were either neutral or not friendly. region. With over forty countries in the region, the Pacific
Under these Cold War alliances, if a country decided to Command includes countries that are old friends, new
release information to its alliance, all alliance partners had friends, neutral, old adversaries with improving
equal access to the information. These basic rules applied relationships, and a few clearly unfriendly countries. The
to both “sides” during the Cold War.1 Today’s political core problem is how to provide a system that is accessible
from U.S.-only classified systems, provides different
1 These general rules obviously have exceptions. For example, nothing with another partner that differs from the general purpose, multi-lateral
keeps one alliance partner from having a special, unilateral, relationship alliance relationship.levels of classified allied connections, and quickly allows United States closest Cold War allies were those in the
partners to voluntarily—and involuntarily—connect and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). Because of
disconnect from the network. this focus on Europe and NATO, U.S. policy for release of
This paper discusses these network security issues in classified information was arranged to support the NATO
the next four sections. Section 2 provides background model. The basic assumptions for the NATO classified
information on typical data security methods developed information release model are that information released
and used by the United States during the Cold War, many within NATO is freely available to all NATO partners,
of which are still in use today. Section 3 briefly discusses and that partners do not connect and disconnect from the
problems caused by our current implementation strategies. network—essentially, the NATO network is a peer
In Section 4, I propose an alliance data network that meets network with a constant set of known partners.
most or all of the requirements from Section 3. Finally, In addition to the NATO alliance network, most
Section 5 concludes by discussing potential problems and NATO countries also maintained separate, private,
by showing how the proposed security architecture not classified network(s) for their internal use. With the
only applies to military alliances but has commercial advent of the Internet and the WWW, many military units
applications as well. also gained access to unclassified public networks.
Because simple and reliable multi-level security operating
2. Background systems were not readily available, having access to three
networks (alliance classified, internal classified, and
During the Cold War, the Soviet Union and its unclassified) meant having three or more separate
immediate allies posed the greatest threat to the United networks with as many sets of user terminals. The United
States and its partners. While the United States and its States was no exception to this arrangement, nor have any
allies engaged in peripheral or proxy conflicts with the of these arrangements changed since the end of the Cold
Soviets in Korea, Vietnam, Malaysia, Yemen, and other War. Table 1 shows the primary components of the
countries, the main focus was always on Europe. The current U.S. network security architecture.
Network Classification Encryption Community Peer Network
SIPRNET SECRET Transmissions bulk encrypted U.S. only Yes
with military grade secret-key
cryptographic equipment.
LANs are unencrypted.
Classified Alliance SECRET Same Alliance Yes
Alliance
Networks
NIPRNET Sensitive but Same. LANs protected by U.S. only Yes
Unclassified (SBU) firewalls.
Internet Unclassified TELCO encrypted. All Normally
Table 1—Different types of networks, SECRET and below.
In Table 1 there are four network security levels on encrypted using secret key, bulk encryption devices
four unique physical networks. The lowest U.S. between transmission nodes.2 Special communications
government network security classification level is the sections are responsible for maintaining the networks, the
internal U.S. government unclassified network. It uses communications links, and the encryption systems. Users
TCP/IP as a transport and networking protocol and is normally assume that any traffic on the network is safe
called the NIPRNET (National IP Routed Network). from any outside eavesdropper. Obviously, encryption
Direct connectivity between the NIPRNET and the global between transmission nodes does not address any insider
Internet is achieved through several portals. The next threat because the local area networks are not encrypted,
U.S.-only network is the SECRET level SIPRNET although they are physically protected.
(SECRET IP Routed Network). From a U.S. security
viewpoint, most SECRET level coalition networks reside
2 Secret key systems rely on a key that is known only to the parties
between these two U.S.-only systems. These coalition sending and receiving the message; compromising a secret key allows all
networks contain information the individual coalition encrypted traffic to be read. These secret key systems are in contrast to
members decide to release to the other coalition members. newer public key systems that use large prime numbers to give every
user a public key and a private key. Secret key systems typically have a
Besides having separate networks for the different
higher throughput than public key systems. For additional information
classification levels, U.S. and alliance networks are see [7, 8, and 9].The first problem of this arrangement is the financial using a special workstation connected to both networks.
cost of accessing the multiple networks. Few military The manual guard introduces the problem of the “man”
units or government organizations have the money to being unable to place information in context. Additionally,
provide users with three or more separate network drops a person can be overwhelmed during high traffic periods.
and terminals. Most units must choose which network The electronic guard mechanisms are more complex, have
they will use (NIPRNET, SIPRNET, or alliance), and a higher throughput than manual guards, but have their
provide computers to everyone on that network. Access to own unique problems. These include strict formatting to
the other networks is provided through common use pass through the guard and the ability for insiders to
terminals. This arrangement causes problems because bypass the guard by removing the words and phrases the
users must go to another location, wait for a free terminal, electronic guard looks for.
and log in. While this situation can be remedied with
multi-level security (MLS) operating systems, these 3. Operational Problems Caused by Existing
products are few in number, and are neither inexpensive Guard Policies
nor easy to use.
Another difficulty of the arrangement becomes evident
From an operational commander’s viewpoint, the U.S.-
when a user tries to move data from one security level to
only restriction on the SIPRNET can severely hamper
the next. When a user wants to move information on a
connectivity with foreign coalition partners. Table 2
computer from one security classification level to a
shows the connectivity a regional commander’s
computer or network on another classification level, the
headquarters has with alliance Y, a close U.S. ally with
bytes associated with the information may be moved in
historic contacts. The table also shows the connectivity the
one of two ways. The data can be moved either directly
regional commander’s subordinate commanders (air,
from one level to the next via the time tested “sneaker net”
ground, and sea) and supporting bases in the continental
or through a guard (manual or electronic) connecting the
U.S. (CONUS) have with alliance Y. In the example,
security levels. The former requires a user to copy files
alliance Y has access to secure telephones and has a
from one computer network to removable media (usually
SECRET level internal, alliance network. Only the U.S.
a floppy disk), and physically move the disk to a computer
regional headquarters has a guard connecting the alliance
on another network with a different security classification.
network with the regional headquarter’s internal network.
The manual guard mechanisms use the traditional “man in
the loop” to verify traffic and pass it between the networks
Regional HQ Alliance HQ with U.S. Component CONUS Support
with Mail SECRET alliance HQ in different Units
Guard network local domain
U.S.-only SIPRNET email X Only with Regional X X
HQ via Mail Guard
Alliance SECRET Network Via Mail X
email Guard
Web browse SIPRNET X X X
Web browse Alliance network X
Full Internet/NIPRNET X X X X
Secure Telephone X X X X
AUTODIN Text Only Teletype X X X X
System
Table 2—Interconnections of Different Headquarters and Networks.
The six shaded cells in Table 2 highlight the problems. Component commanders (air, ground, and sea)
communications gaps between the U.S.-only and alliance are the people who actually provide ships, aircraft,
networks. Secure telephone units and teletypewriters are soldiers, and supplies to any alliance. As such, component
the only areas that provide full interoperability. The lack commanders often need to coordinate directly with
of a web browsing capability is irksome, but can be alliance headquarters and units. Similarly, CONUS based
overcome via email messages for status reports. Currently, support units provide airlift, ground troops, supplies, and
the lack of email between military service level special units (e.g., civil affairs units) and need to
components, their operational subordinates, CONUS communicate directly with the alliance. The only way
based support units, and any alliance network causes Component commanders or CONUS based units cancontact an alliance headquarters or unit is with secure 4.1. Requirements for Alliance Networks
telephones, through the 1950’s era AUTODIN message
system, or by establishing their own dedicated, secure As mentioned earlier, most network research and
connection with a separate guard. implementation for multi-national networks was
Operational units usually have access to secure undertaken during the Cold War. Because of this, most
telephones and have some type of SIPRNET access, albeit current alliance and coalition network research and
without electronic guards. This means that sending long implementation plans continue to have an Euro-centric
electronic messages (e.g., Air Targeting Orders can be approach. This Euro-centric approach assumes all partners
hundreds of pages long) from the alliance network to an are peers, that network membership is stable, and that
aircraft carrier’s U.S.-only network is problematic. anything threatening the alliance threatens all partners.
The lack of network connectivity shown in Table 2 is These assumptions are not valid in all regions of the
clearly a problem for U.S. operational commanders world. Table 3 shows the requirements for an Euro-centric
working with an alliance. The current solution is to network and compares them with what the author believes
provide some alliance level computers where they are the requirements are m to be.
needed, and to move information from one network to The major difference between the proposed alliance
another via the “sneaker net.” While this works, it is slow, network and current coalition networks is that the alliance
inefficient, and prone to errors. network is not necessarily a peer network. While it can be
One final operational degradation is caused by the a peer network, it does not have to be one. NATO
intermittent nature of most alliance networks. To networks and the proposed U.S. Department of Defense
understand and exploit any network’s full capability users Coalition Wide Area Network (CWAN) assume network
need to develop their skills through regular use. The U.S. members always belong to the coalition and that every
and its allies have standing, classified, alliance networks member has the right to access all of the data on the
in only a few locations world-wide. For the rest of the network. However, there are several geo-political regions
world, alliance networks are temporarily operational only where this is not practicable, the Pacific is one of these.
during exercises or real world contingencies, so any The Pacific region has many “hot spots” and has many
lessons learned are generally lost. potential communities of interest. Military allies may not
The difficulties lie in solving these interoperability be on the same side of every conflict. There are often real-
problems without compromising the security of internal world operations or crises happening at the same time
U.S.-only networks, or any other country’s internal exercises are taking place and information is not allowed
network. The author proposes a solution to these problems to flow freely between exercises and real-world—both
in Section 4. because the exercise information may be classified and to
reduce the possibility of real-world operational
4. Alliance Network Architecture (ANA) commanders mistakenly acting upon exercise-only
information. As a result, alliance networks in the Pacific
The proposed architecture, presented in Section 4.2, region must be able to service separate communities of
attempts to solve both the email and web-browsing interest simultaneously. Similar arguments can be made
problems by combining asymmetric encryption (i.e., for networks in Africa, South America, and the Middle
public key technology) for encrypting individual sessions East. As a result, the basic assumption of current coalition
and signing individual data objects, with symmetric network architectures—a stable membership of peers—is
encryption (e.g., Virtual Private Network technology) on invalid for modern alliance networks.
the transmission links. This arrangement provides strong
identification of the user, strong authentication of objects,
and strong encryption the transmissions.Requirement Euro-Centric Coalition Alliance Network
Network
Connection between national networks Yes Yes
and coalition/alliance network
Peer network Yes No
Stable Network Membership Yes No
Provides Virtual Private Networks for No Yes
different national groups
Allows for multiple crises or exercises No Yes
with different classification groups and
information requirements
Multiple security level and communities No Yes, by combining asymmetric
of interest (public key) and symmetric (secret
key) cryptography
Transmission links Bulk encrypted with secret- Same
key cryptographic device
Ability to force member off network Yes, by communication link Yes, by public key revocation or link
termination only termination
Table 3—Alliance Network Requirements.
4.2. Proposed Alliance Network Architecture through unclassified networks using military grade
(ANA) encryption on the data portions of the transmission
packets.
Given the requirements in Table 3, it becomes a matter The first prerequisite is that all computers have a
of finding a way to provide for them. The author believes HPED. Whether the HPED is a Fortezza card, an allied
this can be accomplished by combining asymmetric key manufactured equivalent, or something new is immaterial,
advances with conventional symmetric key system. The as long as it can provide hardware based public/private
proposed solution in this section concentrates on solving keys and digital signatures.4 The next requirement is a
email and web-browsing, the most common strongly encrypted communications link.5 A virtual
shortcomings.3 private network (VPN) is shown in the Figure 1. To enter
The system uses several layers of complementing the enclave, the user first enables the HPED with a
cryptography to achieve strong authentication and password or biometric device. She then begins negotiating
identification of the user and provide strong a trust relationship with the enclave guard through the
communications link encryption. The former uses VPN. The user exchanges digital certificates with the
asymmetric key technology to identify individual users to enclave guard (steps 1 and 2), and uses these to establish a
the network, digitally sign object being passed to the secret symmetric encryption key for bulk encrypting
alliance network, and exchange individual session keys transmissions later in the session. The current methods
for bulk encryption of user packets. The communications and algorithms used for negotiating and encrypting
link is separately encrypted using separate keys from the sessions on 128-bit Secure Socket Layer (SSL) sessions
bulk encryption the user has generated for her individual may be acceptable given the packets are being tunneled
session. through a strongly encrypted VPN.
To enter the alliance network requires at least five Once the individual user’s session key is established
separate steps, these are shown in Figure 1 on the next and a bulk encryption session begins inside the VPN, the
page. Prerequisites for a connection include Hardware user can log into the enclave via the enclave guard with a
Public Key Encryption Devices (HPED) and a separately userid and password. At this point the user has nominally
encrypted communications link. The latter can use pure
military grade point to point link encryption or can tunnel
4 Some readers may be surprised to find Fortezza cards mentioned here.
Rest assured that these devices are alive and well in the U.S. military,
providing a level of identification and authentication well beyond what
3 There are undoubtedly some flaws in this proposed architecture despite software tokens can provide.
the fact that it addresses all the requirements from Section 4.1. The 5 Passing U.S. classified traffic currently requires military grade
author requests the reader’s indulgence to not “throw out the baby with encryption. The best public domain and U.S. exportable algorithm, triple
the bath water” and to use this architecture as a framework for discussing DES, is inadequate for transmitting classified data. This may change
and solving the alliance coalition problem. when a DES replacement is chosen.entered the enclave. This is possible only after providing a user will not be able to access every service or machine
HPED password (or biometric), having a correct within the enclave. The arbitration server issues time
public/private/digital signature on the HPED, providing a limited certificates to users for access to the different
correct userid and password, and being connected to the servers and services within the enclave [2,3].
enclave through the hardware encrypted VPN link. Additionally, every server in the enclave checks both the
Once past the enclave guard, the user contacts the user’s credentials and the authentication server issued
arbitration server. The arbitration server decides what certificate before access is granted. Figure 2 provides an
services and machines a user can access within the architectural overview of an enclave and shows both the
enclave. Because the enclave is not a peer network, every guard and arbitration server.
VPN
Connect Request with
User with
Digital Certificate Enclave Guard
Hardware Public
with Hardware
and Private Key
Public and
Private Key
VPN
Connect Acceptance with
User
Enclave Guard
Digital Certificate
VPN
User Negotiating Bulk Key using Asymmetric Keys Enclave Guard
VPN
User logs into ANA over
User
Enclave Guard
doubly encrypted link
VPN
User User enters enclave
Enclave Guard
Figure 1 – Five Steps for Connecting to the Alliance Network
An additional requirement for the enclave guards is to Systems similar in many respects to the enclave guards
prevent connections from one alliance partner’s network exist today in several different commercial products [6, 7].
directly to another partner’s network (i.e., no “back doors” Similarly, certificate issuing machines that grant
through the enclave guards). This is shown in the figure certificates to authorized users also exist, or can be
with a U.S. user being refused a connection to the foreign constructed using available commercial software [2, 3].
network. This capability to prevent backdoor connections
is required for all partners to trust the system. Note: There
is only one enclave guard per enclave; two guards are
shown in the figure for illustrative purposes only .Email protection in the enclave is straightforward. user’s encrypted session. Finally it is sent through the
Every email message sent to the enclave mail server is hardware encrypted VPN link. All email messages are
triply encrypted. First, with the recipient’s public key and stored on one mail server. Because each mail message is
the user’s private key (digital signature) from the HPED encrypted and contains the sender’s digital signature and
and a randomly generated key—using the same basic the recipient’s public key, storing them on a single server
technique as PGP. Next, the message is sent through the should provide adequate security.
U.S.-only Foreign National Classified Network
U.S
U.S. Workstation Foreign Foreign
Workstation
without ANA Workstation Workstation with
with ANA
without ANA ANA
Enclave Enclave
Guard Guard
Access
Arbitration
Server
Alliance Network Area, shared
and with separate private
communities. All machines
equipped with PKI.
Email Shared Unclass All Alliance
Server Web Server Classified Classified Web Servers for Different
Web Server Private Communities of Interest
Figure 2—Proposed Alliance Network
To provide web browsing security, Web users also communities of interest within the enclave. Placing items
uses three layers of encryption, the session, the on web servers passes through the same two layers of
transmission link, and signing and classification marking encryption as browsing. Again, the arbitration server
by the person placing the object on the web server. The verifies access rights to post objects. Additionally, the
arbitration server allows users access only to those web web server itself also verifies that user has the correct
servers they have permission to access. This allows permissions to post objects to the web. Items posted to theinternal enclave web servers are also digitally signed by exercise with IL; NY is also providing WV with real-world
the user posting the object. Applications accessing the border clash intelligence about SC, a non-alliance
enclave (web browsers, ftp, and telnet) must be public member. VA belongs to the alliance, but is actively is
key/digital signature “aware” and verify the signatures on encouraging outsider SC against alliance member WV.
objects and compare them with the originator’s digital Additionally, VA passed classified alliance information to
signature as a “double check.” SC. As a result, the alliance leadership decided to remove
To explain the enclave access arrangement in greater VA’s full ANA privileges, with the exception of email
detail, assume there are five states, New York (NY), because they hope to use VA to mediate with SC about the
Illinois (IL), West Virginia (WV), Virginia (VA), and border clash. Table 4 shows the access privileges each
South Carolina (SC). States NY, IL, and WV all currently country has within the ANA based upon this scenario.
belong to the alliance. NY is currently conducting an
Valid Members Invalid Members
Email (all types, classified and unclassified) NY, IL, WV, VA SC
Unclassified Web Sever NY, IL, WV VA, SC
Alliance General Purpose Classified Web Server NY, IL, WV VA, SC
Alliance Exercise Web Server NY, IL WV, VA, SC
Alliance Real-World Border Clash Web Server NY, WV IL, VA, SC
Table 4—Privileges Allowed to States NY, IL, WV, VA, and SC
Based upon the Table 4 privileges, the different guards maps the privileges in Table 4 to services and certificates
and servers in the enclave can be configured to provide issued or denied in an enclave. Services provided are
services to the appropriate users and countries. Table 5 identical to those privileges allowed in Table 4.
Users Provided Service Users Denied Service or
Access
Allowed into ANA by PKI Guard NY, IL, WV, VA SC
Request Certificates from Arbitration Server NY, IL, WV, VA -
Issued certificate for mail server NY, IL, WV, VA -
Issued certificate for unclassified web server NY, IL, WV VA
Issued Exercise Web Server certificate NY, IL WV, VA
Private Exercise Server Session #1 NY IL, WV, VA
Private Exercise Server Session #2 IL NY, WV, VA
Issued Border Clash Server certificate NY, WV IL, VA
Private Border Clash Server Session #1 NY IL, WV, VA
Private Border Clash Server Session #2 WV NY, IL, VA
Issued certificate for general purpose classified NY, IL, WV VA
server, each with encrypted separate sessions
Table 5—Alliance Network Area Connections Allowed by PKI Guards and Servers
U.S.-only SIPRNET users are not allowed carte The organization controlling the arbitration server
blanche privileges in the enclave. SIPRNET users are obviously has complete control of all objects—both
required to have the correct authentication, assurances, machines and files—within the enclave. While this
and training to enter the Alliance Network, just like any centralization of authority can cause problems, this can be
other ANA user. All web-browsing and posting is mitigated by policy. Additionally, there can be multiple
conducted through the guards with the assurances and web enclaves (see Section 4.4), each with the arbitration server
object signatures discussed earlier. All email traffic is for that enclave under the control of the enclave’s physical
signed by the sender for authentication purposes and owner.
encrypted for security purposes. Given the level of
protection provided by this architecture, allowing enclave
guards to service multiple SIPRNET domains from more
than one local area may be feasible.4.3. Revoking Keys and Access allows a single connection to a multi-level enclave instead
of requiring many bilateral connections.
One of the problems with the Euro-centric networks is The second technique is to exploit the commercial
removing users and organizations from the network. Internet. This is not commonly done now because it is
Currently, the only way to do this is to change the difficult to control where packets pass while they traverse
cryptographic keys or shut down the communications link. the Internet. For example, packets passing between two
Neither method is trivial. Access to the entire ANA can be countries may conceivably pass through a non-ANA
denied by simply refusing individual connections at the country. Internet based systems are also more vulnerable
enclave guard by either locking the individual’s ANA to denial of service attacks than separate backbone
account or revoking the rights of their public/private key systems. However, by using the proper encryption
pairings. National level connections can be refused either techniques, the Internet may be used at a greatly reduced
in the same manner, by revoking the national groups’ financial cost than a dedicated network. This was done
privileges, or by changing the hardware link encryption recently during operations in East Timor [13].
variables (in the example this was a Virtual Private
Network). 5. Conclusion
The ability to disconnect individuals or national groups
from portions of the ANA while continuing to allow This paper presents the requirements for an alliance
access to other ANA components rests with the user/group network that does not require all alliance members to be
accounts manager at the arbitration server. Limiting treated as peers, and that also provides separate, private
existing services with the arbitration server consists of communities within the network. The network does this
removing access privileges to specific machines (each using a combination of symmetric and asymmetric
serving a separate community of interest) from the user or encryption technology and existing or developing
national group. The next time a newly restricted user equipment. The proposed alliance network can provide a
requests a token for an “off limits” from the arbitration currently unachieved level of interoperability between
server, the request is denied. foreign classified networks and U.S.-only classified
An individual user in a particular country may belong networks.
to several communities of interest in the ANA. The There are several problems with the architecture
individual must have a unique hardware token, userid, and proposed in Section 4.2. First. the proposed architecture
password(s) to gain access to the enclave. Revoking some proposed in Section 4.2 must be fully reviewed,
privileges may not completely remove the user from the accredited, and approved. These review and accreditation
system. Removing a country from access to the ANA will problems aside, there are several other technical and
remove all of that country’s users. However, once a user’s administrative problems that must be addressed. For
or country’s privileges are disabled does not mean they example, there is the purely technical problem of writing
cannot be reinstated later using the same keys, particularly enclave aware applications to administer and transfer files
if the revocation was done at the user/national group to machines located within an Alliance Network Area. For
account level. example, if a user wants to remotely transfer a file to a
web server today, she uses the File Transfer Protocol
4.4. Communications Infrastructure for the (FTP) to log into the server and copy the file to the server.
Alliance Network FTP programs that can negotiate through enclave guards
do not currently exist. Similar problems hold for Telnet
The network and security architecture presented in and other remote administrative tools. These technical
Sections 4.2 and 4.3 detail the basic security arrangements problems can be solved and do not pose a significant
within the Alliance Network Area and the requirements problem.
for users to gain access to the alliance area. It does not The administration and management of a network
discuss how different ANA nodes communicate with one using both symmetric and asymmetric encryption is
another or the user’s communications path from their daunting. Using HPED technology requires every person
work area to an ANA. There are two ways to physically to have an individual hardware token with all of the
reach an ANA node. First, the alliance network can have a appropriate certificates. For example, if a user is a
separate, encrypted, communications backbone. This is command center watch officer and an official message
the current method, is very secure, and relatively difficult release authority, both require additional certificates to be
to attack from outside the network except through issued. Quickly expanding the number of properly
physical infrastructure attacks. It has the drawback of equipped HPED users in a crisis may not be an option, so
being relatively expensive. The ANA proposed in this the enclave system needs to be established in peacetime.
paper does cost less than the current method because itDespite these problems, the alliance architecture [5] National Security Agency, Security Concept of Operations
proposed in Section 4.2 (or something similar to it) needs for the Secure Network Server Guard Through Phase 2D, Ft.
to be established for tomorrow’s military commanders. Meade, Maryland, September 17, 1998.
[6] The Rainbow Corporation provides information on their
Current systems do not provide the interoperability
cryptologic and Public Key devices at www.rainbow.com.,
required between multi-national forces that we need on
October 25, 1999.
the battlefield. The advantage to any vendor developing
[7] The RSA Corporation provides information on their
these systems is that all the systems described herein have
cryptological products at www.rsa.com., October 25, 1999.
clear commercial value as well. The enclave guards, [8] B. Schneier, Applied Cryptography : Protocols, Algorithms,
arbitration servers, and public key aware administration and Source Code in C, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1995.
tools can all be used immediately in the private sector. [9] S. Singh, The Code Book: the Evolution of Secrecy from
Because of the dual utility, the author hopes researchers Mary, Queen of Scots to Quantum Cryptography, Doubleday,
and commercial firms will develop commercial versions New York, 1999.
[10] United States Department of Defense, X.509 Certificate
of these devices which the military can use to implement
Policy, Washington, D.C., March 1999.
improved alliance networks.
[11] United States Department of Defense, Public Key
Infrastructure Roadmap for the Department of Defense,
References Washington, D.C., July 1999.
[12] United States General Accounting Office, Report to the
[1] J. Hamre, Deputy Secretary of Defense Memorandum, Secretary of Defense, Subject: DoD Information Security:
Subject: Department of Defense (DoD) Public Key Serious Weaknesses Continue to Place Defense Operations at
Infrastructure, Washington, D.C., 5 May, 1999. Risk (GAO/AIMD-99-107), Washington, D.C., August 1999.
[2] J. Kohl, and B. Neuman, The Kerberos Network [13] B. Murray, Government Computer News, “U.S.
Authentication Service. Network Working Group RFC 1510, Peacekeepers use Net to Access Classified Network,” Volume
1993. 19, Number 11, 15 May 2000. (see
[3] J. Kohl, B. Neuman, and T. Tso, The Evolution of the www.gcn.com/vol19_no11/dod/1938-1.html)
Kerberos Authentication Service, Distributed Open Systems,
IEEE Press, 1994.
[4] National Security Agency, NSA Policy on Use of FORTEZZA
for Protecting Classified Information, Ft. Meade, Maryland,
January 22, 1996.