Dial One for Scam:
A Large-Scale Analysis of Technical Support Scams
Najmeh Miramirkhani Oleksii Starov Nick Nikiforakis
Stony Brook University Stony Brook University Stony Brook University
nmiramirkhani@cs.stonybrook.edu ostarov@cs.stonybrook.edu nick@cs.stonybrook.edu
Abstract—Intechnicalsupportscams,cybercriminalsattempt Even though this type of scam costs users millions of
to convince users that their machines are infected with malware dollars on a yearly basis [1], [2], there has been no systematic
and are in need of their technical support. In this process, the study of technical support scams from the security community.
victimsareaskedtoprovidescammerswithremoteaccesstotheir Thus, while today we know that these scams do in fact take
machines, who willthen “diagnose the problem”, before offering
place and that scammers are successfully defrauding users, any
their support services which typically cost hundreds of dollars.
details about their operations are collected in an unsystematic
Despite their conceptual simplicity, technical support scams are
way, e.g., by victimized users recalling their experiences, and
responsible for yearly losses of tens of millions of dollars from
antivirus companies analyzing a handful of scams in an ad-hoc
everyday users of the web.
fashion [3]–[5].
In this paper, we report on the first systematic study of
technicalsupportscamsandthecallcentershiddenbehindthem. In this paper, we perform a three-pronged analysis of
We identify malvertising as a major culprit for exposing users the increasingly serious problem of technical support scams.
to technical support scams and use it to build an automated First, we build a reliable, distributed crawling infrastructure
system capable of discovering, on a weekly basis, hundreds of
that can identify technical support scam pages and use it to
phonenumbersanddomainsoperatedbyscammers.Byallowing
collect technical support scam pages from websites known
our system to run for more than 8 months we collect a large
to participate in malvertising activities. By deploying this
corpus of technical support scams and use it to provide insights
infrastructure,inaperiodof250days,wediscover8,698unique
on their prevalence, the abused infrastructure, the illicit profits,
andthecurrentevasionattemptsofscammers.Finally,bysetting domain names involved in technical support scams, claiming
up a controlled, IRB-approved, experiment where we interact that users are infected and urging them to call one of the
with60differentscammers,weexperiencefirst-handtheirsocial 1,581 collected phone numbers. To the best of our knowledge,
engineering tactics, while collecting detailed statistics of the our system is the first one that can automatically discover
entire process. We explain how our findings can be used by hundreds of domains and numbers belonging to technical
law-enforcing agencies and propose technical and educational supportscammerseveryweek,withoutrelyingonmanuallabor
countermeasures for helping users avoid being victimized by
or crowdsourcing, which appear to be the main methods of
technical support scams.
collecting instances of technical support scams used by the
I. INTRODUCTION industry [3], [4].
A recent and understudied social engineering attack tar- Second, we analyze the corpus of collected data and find
geting everyday web users is a technical support scam. In a multiple patterns and trends about the techniques used and
technical support scam, a webpage created by the scammer the infrastructure abused by scammers. Among others, we
tries to convince users that their machines are infected with find that scammers register thousands of low-cost domain
malware and instructs them to call a technical support center names, such as, .xyz and .space, which abuse trademarks
for help with their infection. The victimized users will then of large software companies and, in addition, abuse CDNs as
willingly provide remote access to their machine and, if the a means of obtaining free hosting for their scams. We trace
scammer successfully convinces them that they are indeed the collected phone numbers and find that while 15 different
infected, pay the scammer a malware-removal fee in the range telecommunication providers are abused, four of them are
of hundreds of dollars. This scam has become so prevalent responsible for more than 90% of the numbers. We show
that the Internet Crime Complaint Center released a Public that scammers are actively evading dynamic-analysis systems
Service Announcement in November 2014 warning users about located on public clouds and find that, even though the average
technical support scams [1]. lifetime of a scam URL is approximately 11 days, 43% of
the domains were only pointing to scams for less than 3 days.
Moreover, we identify potential campaigns of technical support
Permission to freely reproduce all or part of this paper for noncommercial scams, their unique characteristics, and estimate their life time
purposes is granted provided that copies bear this notice and the full citation
finding that 69% of scam campaigns have a lifetime of less
on the first page. Reproduction for commercial purposes is strictly prohibited
without the prior written consent of the Internet Society, the first-named author than 50 days, yet some survive for the entire duration of our
(for reproduction of an entire paper only), and the author’s employer if the experiment. From a financial perspective, we take advantage
paper was prepared within the scope of employment. of publicly exposed webserver analytics and estimate that, just
NDSS ’17, 26 February - 1 March 2017, San Diego, CA, USA
for a small fraction of the monitored domains, scammers are
Copyright 2017 Internet Society, ISBN 1-891562-46-0
http://dx.doi.org/10.14722/ndss.2017.23163 likely to have made more than 9 million dollars.Third, we obtain permission from our IRB to conduct
60 sessions with technical support scammers, where we call
the numbers discovered by our distributed infrastructure and
give scammers access to disposable virtual machines, while
recordingtheentiresession.Byanalyzingthecollecteddata,we
calculate precise statistics about the abused tools, the utilized
social engineering techniques, and the requested charges.
Among others, we find that scammers are patient (average
call duration is 17 minutes), abuse a limited number of remote
administration tools (81% of all scammers used one of two
software tools), charge victims hundreds of dollars (average
charge is $290.9), and are creative in their ways of convincing Fig. 1: Screenshot of a technical support scam which mimics a
usersthattheirmachinesareinfectedwithavirus(morethan12 Windows blue-screen-of-death to increase its trustworthiness.
different techniquesutilized). Moreover, we usea large number
machine. After connecting, the scammer, unfortunately, has
of volunteers to estimate the size of call centers operated by
full control over the user’s machine. The scammer will then
scammers and find that the average call center is housing 11
proceed to demonstrate the infection by showing errors and
technicalsupportscammers,readytoreceivecallsfromvictims.
supposed problems that, in reality, are typical of any Windows
Finally, we explain why educating the general public about installation. As soon as the scammer realizes that the user
technical support scams should be easier than educating them is convinced, he will then offer to fix the problem for a fee,
about other security issues, and propose the development of typically in the range of hundreds of dollars which the user is
an, in-browser, “panic button” that non-technical users would asked to pay by giving her credit card number to the scammer.
be educated to use when they feel threatened by the content As one can clearly understand, the above scenario will, at best,
of any given webpage. result in the user paying hundreds of dollars for unnecessary
services. At worst, the scammer can keep charging the credit
Our main contributions are:
card until the limit is reached, install malware and keystroke
• We design and develop the first system capable of loggers on the user’s machine, and use them to exfiltrate the
automatically discovering domains and phone numbers user’s private and financial information [7].
operated by technical support scammers.
• We perform the first systematic analysis of technical III. DATACOLLECTIONANDANALYSIS
support scam pages and identify their techniques,
A. Source of technical support scam pages
abused infrastructure, and campaigns.
• We interact in a controlled fashion with 60 scammers Even though technical support scams are a known phe-
andcollectintelligencethatcanbeusedfortakedowns, nomenon,theexactdetailsofhowauserendsuponatechnical
technical countermeasures, and public education. support scam page are less known. In order to study this
• We make a series of propositions for educating the phenomenon, we need access to a steady stream of URLs
publicabouttechnicalsupportscamsandforprotecting with high toxicity, similar to the needs of dynamic analysis
users from abusive pages. frameworks for the detection of drive-by downloads [8].
We argue that most users are exposed to malicious content
II. BACKGROUND
via malvertising. The constant stream of news of malvertising
A technical support scam begins with a user landing on detected on popular websites [9]–[11], and the constant
a page claiming that her operating system is infected with crackdown (and promises of crackdown) from advertising
malware.Pageshostingtechnicalsupportscamstypicallyabuse networks [12]–[14] make this clear. Therefore, even though a
logos and trademarks of popular software and security compa- scammer could, in theory, try to lure individual users to click
nies, or operating system UIs, to increase their trustworthiness. on direct links towards his scam pages, this behavior will not
Figure 1 shows an example scam page. Instead of requesting onlyresultinareducednumberofvictimsbutalsointhefaster
from users to download software, as typical scareware scams identification and thus takedown of the malicious page. The
did in the past [6], these scams request from the users to naturalnon-determinismofadvertisingnetworksandtheability
call a support center for help with their infection. The posted to trace the provenance of the current visitor, provide ample
number is often a toll-free number which is clearly used to opportunities for scammers to reveal themselves to victims
increase the chances that a user would actually dial it. Finally, while hiding from search engines and security researchers.
the page is using intrusive JavaScript techniques in order to
make it hard for the user to navigate away, such as, constantly In this paper, we take advantage of the results of specific
showing alert boxes that ask the user to call the technical recent studies which found that two types of services, namely,
support number, and hooking into the onunload event, which domain parking and ad-based URL shorteners, engage in
istriggeredwhentheuserattemptstoclosethecurrentbrowser malvertising practices that endanger users.
tab, or navigate away from the current website.
Domain Parking. Domain parking companies compile port-
Onceausercallsthelistednumber,shewilleventuallyreach folios of tens of thousands of underdeveloped domain names
a person requesting access to her machine in order to diagnose whichtheyusetoshowadstothelandingusers.Ifauserclicks
theproblem.Theuserisinstructedtodownloadremotedesktop on an ad, the domain parking company will then, presumably,
software and allow the remote “technician” to connect to her give a portion of the advertising profit to the owner of the
2unused domain. Apart from hiding advertising profits from the Shortened Typosquatting Popular
domain owners [15], many domain parking companies have URLs Models Domains
been found to collaborate with dubious advertising networks
Scammers
which do not hesitate to occasionally redirect a user to a c iv
page with malware. In fact, Vissers et al., while researching o Crawler Crawler Crawler
b 1 2 3
the types of ads that users who land on parked websites are o R
exposed to, discovered two pages which fit our definition of Parking
a technical support scam [16]. To find a sufficient number of Other Services
WARNING
parked domains that our crawlers can visit, we take advantage
Dangerous Virus
ofthefactthatpriorresearchhasshownthatdomainparkingis Detected. Data at
thefavoritemonetizationmethodofdomainsquatters[17]–[22]. Risk.
Therefore, as long as we visit typosquatting variants of popular … Call 123-456-7890
domain names, such as twwitter.com (note the duplication of
Advertising Networks Technical Support
the ‘‘w’’ character), the majority of our visits will end up on
Scam Pages
domain parking companies which will redirect a fraction of
Ads on Spam Social Malicious
these visits to technical support scams. other websites Emails Networks Extensions
Other potential scam sources
Ad-based URL Shorteners. Ad-based URL shorteners are
services that allow the users who shorten URLs to make a Fig. 2: High level view of our automated detection and collection
commission every time that other users visit their shortened tool of technical support scams (ROBOVIC) and its interaction with
URLs. Instead of immediately redirecting the short-URL- the technical support scam ecosystem
visiting users, ad-based URL shorteners force users to view
to match a typical user browsing the web using a Microsoft
an ad for a few seconds, before they can proceed to the
WindowsOS. ROBOVIC usesaMITMproxytorecordrequests
intended,“long”,URL.Nikiforakisetal.studiedtheecosystem
and responses, clicks on pop ups and logs the HTML code
of ad-based URL shortening services and their ad-delivery
of all the nested iframes, the final URL, the text shown in
methods [23], finding a large percentage of malvertising.
alert boxes and the functions used in commonly abused event
handlers,suchas,theonunloadhandler,aswellasascreenshot
Generality of our approach. Note that we are not claiming
of the page. Finally, given the adversarial nature of technical
thatscammersexplicitlycollaboratewitheitherdomain-parking
support scam pages, e.g., the locking of a user’s browser via
agencies, or ad-based URL shorteners. Instead, we use these
the use of the JavaScript-accessible, browser-provided alert
two services as our gateway to malicious advertising, rather
function, we developed our crawler in such a way that allows
than as a method for identifying specific advertisers. As such,
it to interact with these pages but not get trapped by them.
we argue that our methodology will be able to detect, with
equal probability, all scammers that are using advertising as a We deployed the ROBOVIC Crawler on three different sites
way of attracting victims. (our campus, Amazon’s Elastic Compute Cloud [25], and on
Linode’s cloud [26]). We provided each instance with the
B. Tool design and implementation same set of 10,000 possible typosquatting domains, which we
obtained by applying the typosquatting models of Wang et
Our tool for discovering and recording technical support
al. [18] on the top 200 websites according to Alexa, and a set
scamsiscalled ROBOVIC (RoboticVictim).Ourmainobjective
of 3,000 shortened URLs belonging to ten popular ad-based
istocollectasmuchdataaspossibleaboutthishighlyprofitable
URL shorteners. The crawler instances initiate the crawling
undergroundbusiness,inordertoconductasystematicstudyof
process at the same time each day and collect and store all
technicalsupportscamsandanalyzetheiruniquecharacteristics.
Atthesametime,anecessaryconditionforgatheringtechnical-
the aforementioned data. Note that ROBOVIC was originally
relyingjustondomainparkinginordertofindtechnicalsupport
support-related data is the development of a reliable and highly
scams and we incorporated ad-based URL shorteners later in
availableinfrastructure,thatwillprovideuswithenoughuptime
our study. We denote the exact date while analyzing the data
to be able to study temporal properties of technical support
in Section IV.
scams. Figure 2 shows the high-level view of ROBOVIC, the
high-toxicity,inputstreamsofURLs,andtheinteractionsofour
Detector. The Detector Module identifies the pages that are
tool with the technical support scam ecosystem. We describe
the most likely to be technical support scams based on a set of
ROBOVIC’s core components below:
heuristic rules. We examined several heuristics, such as, having
a redirection chain, showing consecutive alert dialogues, the
Crawler. The Crawler is in charge of browsing and collecting
presence of a phone number, and the presence of special
data for the given set of URLs and recording information
keywords. After observing approximately a week’s worth of
about the resulting pages. To address the requirements of our
collecteddata,wedesignedourheuristicwhichminimizedfalse
study, we extended OpenWPM which is a generic web privacy
negatives and false positives as follows: If a page has any kind
measurementplatform[24].Morespecifically,weimplemented
of popup dialogue, we check its content using an empirically
a custom browser extension to instrument the browser so that
constructeddecisiontreeandbasedonthepresenceofcarefully
specific native JavaScript functions, like the aforementioned
chosen sets of keywords, we score the page and mark it as
alertfunction,wouldbeoverwrittenbeforeloadingapage,in
malicious if the score is higher than a tuned threshold.
a way that allows us to record the frequency of calls and exact
messagesdisplayedtousers.Inaddition,ourbrowserextension To gauge the accuracy of our heuristic, we use random
ensured the modification of the browser’s user-agent properties sampling to select three days (from the 250 days that are
31000
100
10
15/10/01 16/01/01 16/04/01
Date
sniamoD
macS#
Server Campus Linode Amazon
100
10
15/10/01 16/01/01 16/04/01
Date
srebmuN
enohP
macS#
Campus Linode
Server
2.7%
83.8% 2.8%
4.5%
1.8% 2.5%
1.9%
Amazon
Server Campus Linode Amazon Fig.4:VenndiagramofUniquePhoneNumbersDetectedbyROBOVIC
instances
A. Discovered scams
Ofthe5milliondomainsresolvedby ROBOVIC,22KURLs
were detected as technical support scam pages, belonging
Fig. 3: Number of unique weekly technical support scam domains to 8,698 unique domains. Figure 3 (top) shows the weekly
(top)andphonenumbers(bottom)recordedbyeachROBOVICinstance numberofuniquedomainsfoundbyeachofourthreedeployed
during our 36-week monitored period. The vertical line denotes the ROBOVIC instances during our data-collecting period. One can
week on which we adopted an extra source of malvertising pages, see that, as time passes, technical support scams are becoming
namely, that of shortened URLs. increasinglycommonreachingmorethan1,000uniquedomains
per week in April and May 2016. Interestingly, phone numbers
cannot keep up with that growth (Figure 3, bottom), suggesting
crawlers are active) and manually analyze all page screenshots
thatcurbingtheabuseofphonenumberswillhaveasignificant
collected by ROBOVIC (17K screenshots), during those days.
effect on technical support scams.
Through this process, we verified that our heuristic was able
to capture all technical support scams collected by ROBOVIC. Another visible pattern is the great difference between
Interestingly, we identified some scam pages that would use the number of scam domains to which our campus-residing
HTML to draw fake alert boxes when a user visited them. Our ROBOVIC was exposed, compared to the ROBOVIC instances
heuristic, however, can still detect them as they switch back to located on Amazon’s and Linode’s hosting clouds. Since all
the native JavaScript alerts when the user attempts to navigate crawlerswereaskedtocrawlthesamedomainsandnoneofthe
away from the page (aiming to trap the user on the same page). three ROBOVIC instancesexperiencedanydowntimeduringour
This manual inspection makes us confident that our heuristic monitored period, the only reasonable explanation is that the
can account for most, if not all, of the technical support scams dubious advertising networks responsible for redirecting a user
that ROBOVIC was exposed to during the monitored period. from a typosquatting page to a technical support scam page
are using the user’s IP address as a way of straightforwardly
Liveness Checker. The Liveness Checker is the final com- evading crawlers located on popular commercial clouds.
ponent of ROBOVIC which is responsible for tracking the
lifetime of a scam page after it first appears in the crawler’s An alternative way of looking at the unique scam domains
feed. Every URL that the Liveness Checker receives from the discovered, is to consider the individual coverage of each of
Detector component, is added in a database of URLs that will our three ROBOVIC instances. In terms of domain names, our
becrawledonadailybasis.Inaddition,foreveryURLreceived, campus-residing ROBOVIC, discovered 95.7% of the domain
the Liveness Checker computes neighboring URLs that could names discovered by all three instances, with the Linode- and
be hosting a technical support scam page, e.g., removing GET Amazon-residing ROBOVIC instances, contributing only 7.6%
parameters from a URL and iteratively reducing the resource- of the overall unique domains. Similarly, the same campus-
path until we reach the main page of a domain. On any given residing ROBOVIC instance, by itself, discovered 92.8% of
day, a scam is considered to be “alive” if any of the above the total number of unique telephone numbers (see Figure 4).
URLs responds with a page that matches our aforementioned Overall, our results indicate that, because ad networks and
scam-page heuristic. The lifetime of any given scam domain attackers are location-aware, proxy-less servers located on
is the longest time period, in terms of days, that began and popular commercial clouds, have only a small contribution
ended with a page marked as a technical support scam. We in the discovery of scam pages and phone numbers.
chose this definition to account for transient errors (support
Figure 3 (bottom) shows the number of unique telephone
scam goes offline for one day) and for malvertising variance
numbers discovered each day and exhibits a similar behavior
(same domain can first show a support scam, then a survey
as Figure 3 (top). Comparing the two figures together, one
scam [27], and then again a support scam).
can see that while telephone numbers and domains are clearly
correlated, the relationship between the two is not a 1-to-
1 relationship. The reason for this is that scams located on
IV. DATAANALYSIS
different domains can be showing the same phone number,
Inthissection,wereportonthedatacollectedby ROBOVIC as well as the phone number on any given page can change
during a 36-week period, starting from September 1, 2015. between page loads. By inspecting some of the JavaScript code
ROBOVIC attempted to resolve 8.4 million domains and locatedinsuchpages,wefoundevidenceof“on-the-fly”,phone-
collected a total of 15TB worth of crawling data. numberdelivery.Byanalyzingthecodewefoundthatscammers
4are abusing a pay-per-call management framework called var ran = false;
Callpixel (rebranded as Retreaver). In Pay-per-call marketing, function loadNumber() {
if (!ran) {
unlike pay-per-click (PPC) advertising, an advertiser will be
//Default numbers in case script fails
chargediftheadvisitormakesacalltoatrackedphonenumber. var default_number = "(877) 292-3084";
Retreaver, as a pay-per-call management framework, can track var default_plain_number = "8772923084";
and tag visitors based on various features, such as, browser //Initiates new instance of specific campaign
profile, and geolocation, and provide them with customized var campaign = new Callpixels.Campaign({campaign_key: ’
43019bb72cd5ecc4e3b33902645dd4d6’});
toll-freenumbersassigned“on-the-fly”fromapoolofnumbers.
//Script collects information about the user and the
As the number is only available to a specific campaign at a affiliate ID of the scammer
specific time, Retreaver can tag the incoming calls, forward var tags = {};
var source_host = ’https://gyazo.com/714[...]b7915’;
them to the call center configured for that campaign, and
var affiliate_id = ’1’;
log it to calculate the conversion rate. 10% of the domains var clickid = ’Rb10lsaOkY’;
in our corpus used variations of JavaScript code to use the var browser = ’Firefox’;
var browserversion = ’25.0’;
Retreaver API. While this novel marketing model is designed var country = ’US’;
for legitimate businesses for delivering highly targeted pay-per- var os = ’Windows’;
[...]
call campaigns, it is abused by the scammers to generate fresh
//Populates an object with the gathered information
numbers dynamically. Figure 5, shows a sample scam snippet tags = {
which reads browser properties (operating system, user agent, a: affiliate_id,
clickid: clickid,
and language) and calls the Retreaver API to get a JSON file
source_url: source_host,
containing a telephone number. browser: browser,
browserversion: browserversion,
Lastly, by analyzing the data collected by the Liveness country: country,
os: os,
Detector module of ROBOVIC, we discovered that the lifetime [...]
of scam domains forms a long-tail distribution. Specifically, };
//Function that retrieves a dynamic number
27% of the domain names are reachable only for a single day
campaign.request_number(tags,
after they are first discovered by ROBOVIC, while 43% of the function (matching_number) {
domains are reachable for up to three days. At the same time, //Stores the dynamic number in global variable
number = matching_number.get(’formatted_number’);
7%ofthediscovereddomainswerereachableformorethan40
plain_number = matching_number.get(’plain_number’);
days indicating that these are successful in avoiding unwanted window.callpixels_number = matching_number;
attention and take-downs. },
function (error) {
number = default_number;
plain_number = default_plain_number;
}
B. Domain names
);
ran = true;
Of the total 8,698 unique scam domains collected by //Shows the new number to victim user
ROBOVIC, 17% are completely human readable making ex- var number = "1 "+number;
FormattedNumber1.innerHTML = number;
tensive use of words that either imitate a legitimate brand, or [...]
attempttoscarethevictim.Thefivemostfrequentlyusedwords }
in domains were: techsupport, alert, pc, security, and window.onfocus = loadNumber();
windows. 83% of the domains contained at least one random Fig. 5: Partial JavaScript code that shows the dynamic fetching of
string and 6% belonged to Content Delivery Networks (CDN) a toll-free number based on the current victim’s attributes, and the
such as CDN77, CDNsun, KeyCDN, and MetaCDN. fallback logic in case the dynamic fetching fails.
Although the primary goal of CDNs is to provide high The set of collected scam domains, after removing CDN
availability of static content, scammers abuse them as a way entries,mapsto1,524TLD+1domainsresolvingto685unique
of obtaining free or near-free hosting for their scam pages. IP addresses. This reduction in the size of hosting providers,
Content Delivery Networks, such as, CDN77, CDNsun, and confirms the use of shared-hosting as a way of getting cheap
KeyCDN offer free services without requiring a phone number domains and hosting which can be easily changed to evade
or a credit card. In addition, every uploaded scam page gets its blacklisting. The majority of scam-page hosting is done in the
own random-string-including URL which can not be guessed US(88%),followedbyalongtailofvariouscountries,suchas,
and thus cannot be preemptively blacklisted (blacklisting the India and Netherlands. While India is not an obvious hosting
entire CDN-controlled domain would cause collateral damage). choice, we show that many scammers seem to be operating
out of it (Section V). We also mapped the IP addresses to
Technicalsupportscamdomainsareunusuallylong.At-test AS names and found that 18% of the scam hosts are using
onthedistributionofdomainlengthof8Kscamdomains(with Cloudflare to hide their hosting server.
an average length of 76±56) and the top 8K Alexa domains
(with an average length of 12±3.5) results in a very small p- Lastly,wefocusedontheWHOISrecordsofscamdomains.
value(p<0.05)whichindicatesthatthedifferenceissignificant. From the 1,524 TLD+1 domain names, we were able to
By inspecting a sample of the scam pages hosted on long scam extract1,055(69.2%)emailaddresses.Thedifficultyofparsing
domains, we found that scammers make use of long domains WHOIS data [28] was compounded by the fact that 344
to,amongothers,evadethebuilt-inmechanismofthebrowsers domains did not even have an email address listed in their
for suppressing pop-ups. We discuss these techniques further WHOIS records. 589 email addresses belonged to multiple
in Section IV-D. WHOIS privacy companies which stopped us from identifying
5Fig. 6: Two samples of technical support scam campaigns. The
left graph shows the relationships between unique domains and
phone numbers. The right graph shows the relationship between
unique, TLD+1 domain names and phone numbers. Black and gray
nodes represent phone numbers and domain names/TLD+1 domains
respectively and size of a node is proportional to the node degree.
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0 50 100 150 200 250
Campaign Lifetime in Days
ytilibaborP
.muC
TABLE I: Characteristics of the top five campaigns. D: Domains, P:
Phone numbers
#D #P TLDs Prefixes #IPs/#ASs Country Top AS or Lifetime
CDN (days)
3714 93 net,com 855,844, 35/3 US,NL CloudFlare 64
888,877
513 96 biz, net, 844,877, 93/20 US, IN, Cloudflare, 250
com,in,us, 855,866, FR GoDaddy
xyz, space, 888,800
website,
info, club,
online, me,
cf, ga, org,
co, tk, ca,
site
173 359 space, info, 888,855, 42/7 DE,FR, cdn77, 235
com, org, 844,877 US cdnsun,
net metacdn,
keycdn
145 164 info, help, 888,844, 33/9 US, IN, Amazon 185
online, 877,855, NL
website, 800,866
com, xyz,
in,net
68 15 net, com, 844,888 1/1 US 1and1 250
org,info
582 connected components of various sizes, of which 216
connected components have more than 5 nodes. A sample of
theconnectedcomponentsisdepictedinFigure6(left).Asone
cannotice,thesamenumbersarereusedacrossasetofdomain
names and, vice-versa, a domain may advertise different phone
numbers over its lifetime.
Fig. 7: CDF of the lifetime of scam campaigns.
Toidentifyconnectedcomponentswhicharemorerepresen-
tativeofscamcampaigns,wemergethedomainnodesthathave
common individuals behind different domains. By inspecting
the same TLD+1 domain and replot the network graph. The
the remaining 466 addresses we noticed patterns of simi-
newgraphcontains434connectedcomponentswhilethephone
lar names, such as, amitabb8@gmx.com, amitabb9@gmx.com,
nodes and domain nodes have an average degree of 2.8 and
amitapp1@gmx.com and amitabb6@gmail.com. To automati-
2.5 respectively. The maximum degree of phone nodes is 173,
cally cluster these emails we used the Levenshtein distance
and the maximum degree of domain nodes is 34. One sample
metric and grouped together addresses with a distance of
of a connected component in this graph which represents a
less than 5. This resulted in the formation of 192 clusters,
technical support scam campaign is plotted in Figure 6 (right).
including 65 clusters with at least two email addresses and
One interesting characteristic of this subgraph is that the center
6 with more than ten. The two largest clusters contained 60
sixphonenumbersareconnectedtoalmostallofthecampaign’s
(united by supernetws[0-9]+@yahoo.com) and 27 (united by
domain names. After investigating these specific scam pages,
charmssprince@gmail.com)domainsrespectively.Ourresults
we discovered that these numbers are the default numbers that
highlight that even though scammers attempt to hide from
would be used by the scam page in case an error happens
analysis systems, a large-enough corpus of scam domains may
during the on-the-fly retrieval of a new phone number.
still allow the grouping of seemingly unrelated scams.
We estimate the life time of scam campaigns by adding
timestamps to the nodes of the network graph. We define the
C. Phone numbers and their relationship to domains
lifetimeofacampaignasthedifferencebetweenthetimestamps
Since phone numbers are a crucial part of technical support of the first and last domain or phone number joined to the
scams, we used a public database of toll-free numbers [29] to subgraph of the campaign. As Figure 7 shows, the distribution
get more information about them. There, we discovered that ofcampaigns’lifetimeisnotnormaland69%ofthecampaigns
even though the 1,581 toll-free numbers belong to 15 different have a lifetime of less than 50 days. Even though the average
telecommunication providers, more than 90% belong to only lifetime is 45 days, there are campaigns with a life time of
four providers (Twilio, WilTel, RingRevenue, and Bandwidth) more than 250 days (the whole duration of our experiment).
which indicates that scammers are abusing some providers Moreover, assuming that the size of a campaign is equal to the
significantly more than others. Moreover, we discovered 77.5% size of its graph, there is a positive correlation (r=0.5) between
ofthephonenumberswereactivatedlessthanoneyearagoand the lifetime of a campaign and its size. We can, therefore,
none of the vanity terms associated with the collected numbers conclude, that larger technical support campaigns tend to be
is related to tech support. active for a longer time.
To gain insights on the N-N relationship between scam Table I shows the characteristics of the five largest cam-
domains and phone numbers appearing on scam pages, we paigns and their estimated lifetime. The utilized toll-free pre-
plotted their network graph. In this graph, an undirected edge fixes,TLDsandhostinginfrastructurediffersamongcampaigns
between a domain name and a phone number exists, if the with the two first campaigns, besides having rich and diverse
phone number was advertised by the domain name during the infrastructures, hiding their hosting servers behind Cloudflare.
time period of our experiment. The resulting graph contains One can also see that many of these campaigns use cheap
6address laicnanif message liame
call
trackinglogs breach stalkersusing carry result hacked thefts www
virus ancient
exe
communications
administrator
secivres situation
attention
suspended restart
depud oops contacting
webcam
passwords
yrtsiger
technicians
connection
adware
prevent
delbasid
blocked
reserved run worm
pop
access program
emarf
warning
unknown live gnorw
classified
attack desk
actions
inject info computing
detailssomething
erawlam
engineering significant technical response
copyright
shut follow vpn
calling
harmful browsing especially
anonymous
noitacol
dear
containing
dellatsni
continue
caused visit
current
causing
desopxe
concealed theft
leaked apply tcp
acts warriors often
usefulreason
laicos
rights
llawerif identity
major
disk
logins
devomer
locked password cause
viruses
hard
epyt
deteled
page
fix auto based
mrof
com trick
port erawtfos
mpqr
crash
Fig.9:Screenshotsofphonelookupmobileappswhenreceivingcalls
terms from scam numbers: Should I Answer? (left), CallDetector (right)
harmfull
Fig.8:Wordcloudbasedonthetextcontentsofthegatheredtechnical show that existing blacklisting efforts fall severely short of
support scam pages capturing scam domains and phone numbers.
TLDs, such as, .xyz, .space and .club, to generate many
Domain blacklisting. First, we check our collected 1,524
variations of scam domains.
TLD+1 scam domains against a combined set of popular
blacklists including hpHosts [30], suspicious domains by
D. Page contents SANS [31], malwaredomains [32], malwaredomainlist [33],
Malc0de database [34] and, abuse.ch [35]. We use snapshots
Scammers use specific words in the content of a scam page
of these databases starting from 2014, which overall contain
to convince the users that their machines are infected with a
records for approximately 370K domains and IP addresses.
virus. Figure 8 shows the most frequent words used in the
Surprisingly, out of 1,524 scam domains, only 108 (7%) were
scam pages in the form of a word cloud, where the size of
blacklisted. Moreover, out of the 108 blacklisted domains, only
each word is correlated with the number of times it appeared
in our collected corpus of technical support scam pages.
16 were already blacklisted on the day that ROBOVIC first
detected them. The rest were blacklisted, on average, 38 days
Next to specific words, scammers also abuse browser APIs after ROBOVIC’sdetection.Wealsoresolvedthescamdomains
to increase the effectiveness of their scams. In Section II, we and checked whether their IP addresses were blacklisted. From
discussed how scammers abuse alert dialogues to make it the 685 resolved IP addresses, only 28 (4%) were already
hard for users to navigate away. Some browsers, however, give present in one of the aforementioned blacklists.
users the ability to suppress alert dialogues, if a page is
Second,werepeatourexperimentusingVirusTotal’sdomain
abusing them. For instance, in Google Chrome, if a page uses
tools. There, we discovered that 974 of 1524 TLD+1 domains,
two back-to-back alert dialogues, the browser adds to the
i.e., approx. 64%, were detectable by, on average, 3.25 AV
second alert dialogue, a checkbox that the user can check to
engines on VirusTotal. Since VirusTotal does not show the date
“Preventthispagefromcreatingadditionaldialogs.”49%ofthe
of first discovery of a malicious domain, we cannot calculate
collected scams were using very long alert messages, padded
with whitespaces and new lines in an attempt to elongate the
the exact fraction of domains which ROBOVIC discovered
before AVs. Moreover, since VirusTotal houses 68 different
alertdialoguetoapointthatthenewlyaddedcheckboxwould
AV engines, we argue that the vast majority of AV users are
be out of the user’s view. The rest were trying to bypass the
likelynotgoingtobeprotectedagainsttechnicalsupportscams,
alert-dialogue threshold, by using multiple event handlers,
even if they are accessing one of the 974 domains that were
launching alert dialogues from each one, in combination with
detectable by VirusTotal.
the creation of new pop-up windows and subdomains. It is
also worthwhile to note that Internet Explorer does not offer Phoneblacklisting.Therearedifferentkindsofabusepossible
such a mechanism and thus a malicious webpage can keep on via phone calls, including spam, scam, and extortion. Conse-
launching alert dialogues without the user being able to stop quently, many phone-lookup services exist that keep databases
them, or navigate away while a dialogue is shown. of malicious phone numbers. These databases are typically
crowdsourced relying on users to submit complaints. In recent
Lastly, we observed that 87% of the discovered scam pages
years, in addition to websites that users can utilize to look
wereusingHTMLaudiotags,toautomaticallylaunchrepeating
up phone numbers, there exist mobile apps that give users
audio clips that either sounded like an alarm, or were text-to-
real-time information about a number that is calling them.
voicetracks,highlightingtheseverityoftheproblemandasking
the user to call the listed technical support number. To assess whether these databases include phone numbers
involved in technical support scams, we scraped six websites
E. Sufficiency of existing blacklists searching for complaints for any of our ROBOVIC-detected
1,581 phone numbers. Moreover, we investigated how well the
Technicalsupportscamsrequirebothdomainnamesaswell
five most popular caller-id and fraud-protection Android apps
as(toll-free)phonenumbers.Assuch,onecouldreasonthat,in
were able to detect technical support scam numbers.
contrast with most other attacks where only malicious domains
are utilized, defenders have two chances to protect users via To avoid reverse engineering each app, we opted to install
blacklisting: one by blacklisting domains, and one more by each app in an Android emulator and simulate calls originating
blacklistingphone numbers.Weevaluate popularblacklists and from each of the 1,581 scam-operated phone numbers. Some
7statisticsincludingclients’requests,clients’IPaddresses,server
TABLE II: Presence of the collected 1,581 technical support scam
uptime, and total traffic [36].
phone numbers in popular phone lookup databases: website searches
(white), mobile in-app alerts (gray)
ROBOVIC checkedeachdiscovereddomainforthepresence
ofmod statusmoduleandappendedthosethatwereexposing
Database %TSSnumbers ClaimedSize
mrnumber.com 19.9% 1.5billionnumbers it to a list of domains that were crawled every minute by a
800notes.com 18.5% Unknown separate crawler. In this way, by collecting more than 50GB
numberguru.com 1.0% 29millionlookups
of mod status data, we were able to monitor the activity
ShouldIAnswer? 0.5% 640millionlookups
Truecaller 0.5% 2billionnumbers of 142 scam domains over a period of two months. By
Hiya 0.3% 100millionnumbers analyzingthecollecteddata,wediscoveredatotalof1,688,412
badnumbers.info 0.2% 968,639complaints
CallDetector 0.1% 100,000complaintsmonthly unique IP addresses visiting the monitored scam domains. On
callersmart.com 0.1% 5.9millionlookups average, each scam domain received a total of 11,890 visitors
Mr.Number 0.1% 1.5billionnumbers
(approximately 224 visitors per day). The maximum number
scamnumbers.info 0.1% 31,162numbers
Together 27.4% Unknown of visitors of a scam domain was 138,514 and many popular
domains had traffic originating from more than 68K unique IP
appsprovidedacalllogwhichshowedwhetheranygivencaller
addresses.
was a scammer (Figure 9 right). For these apps we simulated
batches of calls and inspected the number of detected scams By geolocating the IP addresses of the visiting users, we
aftereachbatch.Fortheappsthatonlyshowedawarningwhen identifythefollowingfivemostpopularcountries:UnitedStates
a user was receiving a call (Figure 9 left), our tools captured a (33.6%),Australia(25.36%),Singapore(22.40%),Canada(7%),
screenshot of the device during each simulated call and then and New Zealand (4.8%). These results show that scammers
usedperceptualhashingtocreateclustersofsimilarscreenshots. are currently mostly targeting English-speaking countries. Note
At the end of this process, we inspected the resulting clusters that this language-selection is a necessary property of technical
and manually labeled them. support scams since scammers must be able to fluently speak
the language of the victims who will contact them.
TableIIpresentstheresults.Thebest(intermsofcoverage)
phone lookup websites cover less than 20% of technical Assuming that the conversion rate for victims landing on
support scam phone numbers, and for both mrnumber.com technical support scam pages (i.e. calling the listed phone
and 800notes.com, more than 25% of detected scam phone number and buying the technical support scam package offered
numbers were, in fact, detected by ROBOVIC on average 44 by the scammer) is the same as that of users paying for
days earlier (comparing the date of discovery with the date of the “full version” of a fake antivirus (approximately 2%, as
the earliest user complaint). Mobile apps perform significantly calculated by Stone-Gross et. al [6]), 33,768 of the 1,688,412
worsewithallappsdetectinglessthan1%ofthe1,581scammer- users have paid for unnecessary technical support. With the
operatedphonenumbers.Mr.Numberisaninterestingcasesince average price of a technical support scam package being $290
thesamecompanyoperatesboththeappaswellasthewebsite, (calculated in Section V-D), just for the 142 mod-status-
yet the app warned us only for two of the technical support monitored domains, scammers have collected more than $9.7
scam numbers. We suspect that this could be because of some million from unsuspecting users.
overly strict procedure for verifying user-submitted complaints
and converting them to warnings that users will see on their G. Summary of findings
device. Even worse, some phone numbers were identified by
By building a tool (ROBOVIC) that can take advantage
mobile apps as legitimate “computer”, “windows”, or “repair”
of malvertising in order to discover technical support scams,
businesses (even “Dell” or “McAfee”), “technical support”, or
we were able to witness the growth and dynamics of these
“facebook support”, and “call centre” with positive reviews.
scams over an 8-month period. We found that scammers use
If users were to install all apps on their phones and inspect thousands of domains and phone numbers to scare victims into
all websites before making a call, they would still cover less calling them, and make use of blocking APIs and intrusive
than30%ofourcollectedscamnumbers.Byanalyzingthetext techniques to stop users from navigating away from their
of complaints regarding known scam phone numbers on the website. We showed that scams can be grouped into campaigns
evaluatedwebsites,wefoundevidencethatsomescamnumbers and discovered that the most successful scammers were able to
are also involved in other types of scams, including fake law work uninterrupted for the entire duration of our experiment.
firms, debt collectors, and IRS scams. We found 10 such cases We identified the TLDs and telecommunications companies
on mrnumber.com and 24 on 800notes.com. In terms of apps, that are the most abused by scammers and found evidence of
Hiya app identified one of malicious numbers as an IRS scam. on-the-fly phone-number delivery. Finally, we witnessed the
poor coverage of domain-name and phone-number blacklists
F. Estimating the number of victims, their location, and andestimatedthat,justforafractionofthemonitoreddomains,
scammer profits scammers are likely to have made more than 9 million dollars
by defrauding unsuspecting victims.
Although we did not have access to the scammers’ servers,
we took advantage of the misconfiguration of Apache servers
V. INTERACTINGWITHSCAMMERS
of some of the scam domains to collect data regarding their
visitors. Specifically, we noticed that some hosting servers of Eventhoughthevariousmeasurementsofthedatacollected
technical support scam domains had enabled the mod status by ROBOVIC (presented in Section IV) can be used to better
module of Apache servers without restricting access to it. understand the workings of technical support scam domains,
This module provides an HTML page showing current server they provide no insights on what happens when victim users,
8convinced that their machines are infected, call and interact B. Data Sources and Data Collection
with technical support scammers.
Toselectthephonenumbersoftechnicalsupportscammers,
To shed light into this final but crucial part of technical we randomly sampled the pages that ROBOVIC discovered and
support scams, in this section, we report on the data that we ensured that we did not call any number more than once. Note
collected by posing as technically unsavvy users and calling that ROBOVIC discovers technical support scam pages which
60 technical support scammers, while recording our entire claimthatusersareinfectedandfloodtheuserwithalertboxes,
interactions with them. During those interactions, we discover in an attempt to make the user unable to navigate away from
the way that scammers gain access to a user’s machine, the the scam website. As such, we are confident that we never
methods and procedures that they use to convince the user of called a legitimate technical support number.
the purported infection, the average duration of each call, and
the amount of money requested by each scammer. We used VoIP software with conversation-recording capa-
bilities, packet-capturing software residing outside the VM for
A. Experiment Preparation capturing the network traffic of our virtualized OS, and host-
OS-residingscreenrecordingsoftware,forrecordingthevisible
At its core, our study is an observational study. That is,
actions of scammers, once they were given access to our VMs.
we do not seek to apply different treatments to scammers and
After the collection of data from 60 different technical support
observe their effect. We merely seek to observe the methods
scam calls, and the calculation of the statistics described in
that they use in order to defraud an average individual, with
this section, we anonymized all copies of the collected data
no security-related computer knowledge. Even though this
according to our IRB protocol.
defrauding happens on a daily basis, we unfortunately have no
means of tapping into these conversations while they happen.
For this reason, we had to pose as victims and record our C. Script for our interactions
interactions with the scammers.
Throughout our calls, we pretended to be average computer
users who can use their PCs but have no computer knowledge
IRBApproval.Sincescammersarehumansubjects,weapplied
beyond that. For example, we pretended not to know what
to our institute’s IRB and got permission to perform these
an IP address is and, while we knew that having a virus is
recorded calls. Our approved application allows us to make use
bad, we pretended not to know exactly what a virus does on
of deception (we are not revealing our true identities or intent
our computer. We allowed the scammers to remotely connect
to the scammers) and waive the requirement of consent (we
to our system, following their instructions to the letter, and
do not ask the scammers whether they want to participate in
acted with shock, each time that a scammer would interpret
our study). In addition, we convinced the IRB to allow us to
somethingonourscreensastheresultofmalware.Shortlyafter
avoid debriefing the scammers at the end of each call, to avoid
each scammer presented us with the pricing of his services, we
information sharing from the side of the scammers that would
either abruptly ended our calls, or found an excuse to politely
place suspicion on future calls. Since scammers are already
hang-up. We never contradicted the scammers except during
having these conversations with victims on a daily basis, our
thelasttencallsinordertodiscoverhowscammersreactwhen
study does not incur any risk to their emotional, psychological,
users inform them that they are not convinced.
or physical wellbeing.
Inatypicalinstantiationofthistypeofscam,onceavictim
Observed Environment. The very first action that scammers
calls the scammer and explains to him why she is calling,
perform after a victim user calls them, is convince the victim
the scammer takes over the conversation. As such, we argue
to give them remote access to their operating system. For our
that even if each call is slightly different than the rest, the
purposes, we made use of virtualization, where an installation
overall obtained results are aggregatable and generalizable to
of a Microsoft Windows 7 operating system was executing
the population of technical support scam sessions. To quantify
inside a Type-2 hypervisor. The use of virtualization not only
this phenomenon, we utilized a professional audio transcription
allowed us to fully isolate a scammer’s actions from critical
service [38] to obtain the text of five randomly selected calls.
infrastructure, but to also roll-back to a clean state of our
Theaveragenumberofwordsspokenbyscammersineachcall
operating system, after the end of each call.
is 1,367±407, whereas the average number of words from the
To ensure that our VMs look like realistic user systems, victims (ourselves) is 530±172. In addition to the scammers
we artificially aged our virtual machine, by installing different speaking,onaverage,almostthreetimesasmuchasthevictims,
applications, downloading images and documents and placing the standard deviation also shows that regardless of the exact
them on the Windows desktop, and browsing many popular call, the variation of our answers was small compared to the
video sites, gaming sites, and news sites. We changed our variation of the scammers questions.
system clock between different sets of actions so that some
Lastly, we want to point out that we did not pay any
of our actions would appear to have occurred in the past, e.g.,
scammer and therefore are unable to study scammers, after
the timestamps of installed programs and files, and the dates
theyhavechargedusersforunnecessaryservices.Wechosenot
availableinourbrowsinghistory,placedtheseactionsuptotwo
to pay scammers primarily for ethical reasons. As described
years before the beginning of our experiment. Since we limited
later in this section, the average amount of money that a
our visits and downloads to popular websites and applications,
scammerrequestsisalmost$300.Togetstatisticallysignificant
we are confident that our virtual environments were free from
numbers, we would have to pay at least 30 scammers and thus
malware.Finally,wealsoremovedobvioustell-talesignsofour
put approximately $9,000 in the hands of cybercriminals, a
virtualizationenvironmentbychangingtheappropriateRegistry
fraction of which would, almost certainly, be used to fund new
keys and the configuration of our virtual machine [37].
malvertising campaigns and attract new victims.
9SystemInfo
TABLEIII:RemoteAdministrationToolsusedbyscammersforgetting
Stopped Services/Drivers
access to their victims’ machines Specific Virus Described
netstat
RemoteAdministration Installed/Running Programs
Websites
Tool Scammerabuse Fake CMD Scan
www.support.me EventViewer
LogMeInRescue www.lmi1.com 60% Downloaded Scanner
www.logmein123.com Browser History/Settings
CITRIXGoToAssist www.fastsupport.com 21% ActionCenter
www.teamviewer.com
T thA eB irL vE icI
tT
iV
mea
:
sOm TtV oehi e
c
fe r hw ane ir
mqu ae lws au rs
eedw iw nbw f.
y
es csu tS up ic w r opa w w e
p
nm w w m o. w om ra . ce tn g or y e n- sc d t t co e h r an s e o mt k l lro . p . ml c . cl o u oe ed m s m rsinorde1 r72 %%
toconvince
BrowseA
r
cti DHio osn t woC nr le y o/nt aSe dr Ie et nti d
s
tn S ag lc lEs a v eFen da /nn kt Re e r V ui C ne niw M
S
Sne tD pr g
o
eS pcP ic pr fia eo cn
d
g r Vi Sa r em u rns s
vi
e ct Ds et e ss at c ari nb d e Dd r Si yv se tr es mInfo
Technique %Calls Fig. 10: Heatmap showing the conditional probability (ranging from
StoppedServices/Drivers 67 whitetoblack)ofthetenmost often usedsocialengineeringmethods.
EventViewer 52 Note that because, in general, P(A|B) (cid:54)= P(B|A) the heatmap is
SpecificVirusExplained 50
SystemInformation 47 not symmetric along its diagonal.
ActionCenter 40
FakeCMDScan 40 • Stopped Services/Drivers. 67% of scammers loaded the
NetstatScan 40
Installed/RunningPrograms 35 list of Windows services and showed us that many services
BrowsingHistory/Settings 27 were stopped. While this is the normal state of a Windows OS
DownloadedScanner 17
Reliability/Performance 15 installation, the scammers claimed that hackers have stopped
Other(Temp,Registry) 13 these services and that is why they were able to get access to
our machines.
D. Results
•EventViewer.EventViewerisoneoftheadministrativetools
Remote administration tools Before a scammer can start
of Windows that shows general information about a system
convincing users that their machines are infected with malware,
that could be used for troubleshooting purposes. The scammers
he must somehow get remote access to a user’s machine. To
treatedtheerrorsshownbythistoolasasignofhackeractivity.
that extent, the scammer must guide the user into downloading,
installing, and allowing a remote administration tool which he • Virus details. Some scammers, would conclude that our
will then use for his “support” session. system is infected by specific malware, such as “koobface” or
“Zeus.” They would then proceed to navigate our browser to
TableIIIshowsthemostpopulartoolsabusedbyscammers
pages explaining these threats and asked us to read out loud
for connecting to our machines. LogMeIn Rescue and CITRIX
the section of each post describing the damage that the specific
GoToAssist are web applications where a user visits one
piece of malware does to its infected hosts.
of the websites listed in Table III, enters a code given by
the scammer over the phone and downloads a binary that • Netstat scan. 40% of scammers utilized the netstat utility
will eventually allow the attacker to remotely access a user’s toconvinceusthatourmachineisalreadyoccupiedbyhackers.
machine. TeamViewer and AnyDesk are stand-alone programs Specifically, they claimed that each non-local, TCP connection
that a user must download and execute. Once the programs listed in the output of netstat was an attacker who had either
are running, both programs show a customer number and a alreadyconnectedtoourmachine(entrieswithanESTABLISHED
PIN that a user must provide to the scammer in order for the status), or was currently trying to connect (entries with a
scammer to connect to the user’s machine. TIME WAIT status).
In all cases, the scammers were abusing legitimate web • Fake CMD scan. One of the more creative techniques was
applications and programs as part of their scams. Most of theuseofverbosecommand-lineutilitiesasfakevirusscanners.
the aforementioned companies seem to be aware of this 40% of the scammers utilized a command such as ‘‘dir /s’’
phenomenon and warn their users, typically through their which lists files and folders present on a specific path of the
websites, not to allow remote connections from people they do filesystem.Whiletheprogramisproducingoutput,thescammer
not trust. When these messages are pronounced, as in the case typesorcopy-pastestextinthecommand-linewindow,thatwill
of TeamViewer, scammers incorporated these messages into onlyappearaftertheprogramisdoneexecuting.Assuch,atthe
their narratives in order to put us at ease. Other scammers, endoftheprogram’sexecution,theusersuddenlyseestextthat
chose to self-host older versions of the programs that did claims that a virus has been discovered which he is likely to
not include these messages, thereby avoiding the warnings attributetothe“scanning”programthatwasjustexecuting.This
altogether. technique is likely one of the most convincing ones because i)
it does not need interpretation (common messages used were
“Virus detected” and “System at Risk”) and ii) as far as the
Utilized social-engineering techniques.Thescammersuseda
user is concerned, it is his own operating system that produces
variety of techniques to convince us of the purported infections
this message, rather than a downloaded third-party tool.
and the need to purchase their support packages. Table IV
shows the most popular techniques used and the percentage •Performance.Manyscammersusedsysteminformationtools
of scammers that used each technique. We provide a brief to discover the type of CPU and amount of RAM available to
explanation of the techniques that are not self-explanatory: our system. They then praised the hardware of our machine
1015
10
5
0
0 20 40 60
Minutes
sllaC
#
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0 250 500 750 1000
Price in USD
Fig. 11: Distribution of the time duration between the beginning of
a call, and the time when technical support scammers presented us
with the pricing options for their services
before proceeding to search for infections. This was typically
done to convince us that spending money for the removal of
malware was worth the cost since it would allow us to keep
using our machine for many years before we would need to
purchase a new one.
Overall, while we were able to identify techniques commonly
used by scammers, we were impressed with the scammers’
creativity in finding status messages that were already present
on our system and attaching an infection meaning to them. Fig-
ure 10 shows how often scammers used two social engineering
techniques together. There, we use the recorded frequencies to
calculate their respective conditional probabilities.
Duration of calls.Figure11showsthedistributionofthetime
duration between the beginning of a technical support scam
call, and the time when a scammer offered his services in
exchange for money. The average duration of that interval is
17 minutes, and the distribution is approximately normal. In
only a few cases, the scammers first told us the amount of
money that they will be charging (around the second and third
minute of our conversation) and then proceeded to “diagnose”
our machine.
Overall, one can see that the scammers are by no means in
a hurry to convince users and defraud them. They take their
time to slowly guide their victims into installing a remote
administration tool, clicking through all the security dialogues,
and giving them access to their machines. Once they have
access, they slowly work their way through different Windows
tools, showing their output to users and interpreting that output
for them. It is likely that scammers know that the more time
they take to convince a user about an infection, the more
successful they will be when they ask for a compensation
for their services. Figure 11 also provides an indication of
the amount of work necessary in order to obtain real-world
data from technical support scam calls. Specifically, for the
60 calls recorded and analyzed, we spent, during a one-month
period, more than 1,300 minutes (22 hours) just interacting
with scammers, excluding dropped calls, out-of-order numbers,
analysis of the recordings, and verification of our findings.
Since scammers control the vast majority of the conversa-
tion, we opine that the distribution of time shown in Figure 11
will be generalizable to the population of victims. Therefore,
this distribution can be of immediate value to telcos and the
FTC.Specifically,givenalistofnumbersoperatedbyscammers,
telcoscanstraightforwardlyproducemetadataoftheircustomer
base that has called any one of the numbers of technical
ytilibaborP
.muC
Price
Min
Avg
Max
Fig. 12: Requested charges for repairing our purportedly infected
machines. Since most scammers offered us more than one support
packages, we plot the ECDFs for minimum, average, and maximum
amount requested.
supportscams.TheFTCcanthenprioritizetake-downactionby
focusing on the scammers with whom victims were interacting
for more than 41 minutes, that is, the mean of our distribution
plus three standard deviations. Since the duration distribution
is approximately normal, the mean ± three standard deviations
should capture approximately 99.7% of all pre-charge calls. As
such, anyone interacting for more than 41 minutes, is likely a
defrauded victim.
Price of services. Once scammers felt confident that we were
convinced that we are in need of their help, they then informed
us about the price of their services. Most scammers offered us
two to three different options with support packages ranging
from a one-time fix, to multi-year support, ranging anywhere
from $69.99 to $999.99. Figure 12 shows the ECDF of the
amountrequested,splitinitsminimum,average,andmaximum
(average for any given scammer is the average price of all
offered support packages). The average support price across
all support packages and all scammers is $290.9 with most
scammers staying under $500 for all of their support packages.
The prices of support packages were structured in a way
where the middle one made the most financial sense. In fact,
the times that we pretended to be willing to purchase their
supportandrequestedthecheapestoption,thescammerswould
typically try to reason with us that the middle one was a better
value-for-money offer. Interestingly, the price of services did
not correlate with the time that scammers spend convincing us
of our supposed infection (Pearson r=0.11).
Freelance scammers vs organized call centers.Attheoutset
of our study, we did not know whether technical support
scammers are individual freelancers who supplement their
income by single-handedly operating a technical support scam,
or are part of an organized call center. Through the process of
interacting with 60 different scammers, we are now convinced
thatmost,ifnotall,scammersarepartoforganizedcallcenters.
Next to anecdotal evidence that we gathered during our
interactions (e.g. on one occasion, due to technical difficulties
withourVoIPsoftware,wecalledthesamenumberthreetimes
in a row, and were greeted by a different person all three
times), we conducted the following experiment: We replayed
each recorded call and, instead of focusing on the scammer
talking to us, we instead focused on background noises. While
some scammers muted their microphones when they were not
speaking, the majority did not. On 62% of our calls, we were
able to hear other people in the background, often recognizing
phrases about security and malware that the scammer had just
used in his own narrative. Therefore, our results indicate that
11the majority of scammers work in call centers, a fact which Indian, matching our geolocation results. We reason that India
is corroborated by a recent interview of a technical support is the most prevalent country, not only because of the relatively
scammer on Reddit [39]. low average wage [40], but also because India is already a
popular choice for outsourcing call centers of English-speaking
Estimating the size of call centers. Motivated by the finding
countries [41], [42]. Consequently, we do not know whether
that the majority of scammers operate out of call centers, we
the people running these call centers are the responsible ones,
wantedtoestimatethesizeofthesecallcenters,i.e.,howmany
or are merely working for a third-party scammer who has
scammers are “hiding” behind a single toll-free phone number.
outsourced the last part of the scams to them.
To this end, we gathered 20 volunteers and explained to
Scammer Demeanor. In general, scammers exhibited a kind
them the concept of technical support scams, the methods
demeanor. They would patiently guide us through the steps
that scammers use, and the typical narratives of conversations
for downloading their remote administration tool, giving us
with scammers. Each volunteer was given ten toll-free phone
step-by-step instructions for the entire process. They would
numbers operated by scammers (randomly selected by our
take no computer knowledge for granted, even to the point of
pool of numbers) and a list of fake personae which they could
explaining us that the Windows key is the one that “looks like
assume when talking to the scammers (in our experience the
a flag”, between the Ctrl-key and the Alt-key on the bottom
majority of scammers request the caller’s name and address
left of our keyboard. More than one scammer, after having
before proceeding). The ten toll-free numbers were the same
explained to us that we are infected with malware, would open
for all volunteers and they were instructed, guided by our
up Wikipedia pages trying to educate us of the meaning of
signals and a projected stopwatch, to start calling each number
words, such as, “trojan” and “koobface.”
at the same time. Each volunteer was instructed to engage with
each toll-free number for a period of 90 seconds, either by To quantify how a scammer’s behavior changes when
talking to a scammer, or by waiting in a calling queue, or by faced with an expert user, in the last ten of our calls, after
redialing a busy number. Under the reasonable assumption that the scammers showed us “signs” of infection and offered
a scammer cannot be speaking to two people at the same time, their services in return for money, we contradicted them by
thisexperimentessentiallyallowedustoestimatealowerbound explaining that we did not believe them. 60% of the scammers
ofthesizeofacallcenterbycountingthenumberofvolunteers remained calm and polite, and tried to convince us of the
that were able to reach a scammer (either immediately or after legitimacy of their company by showing us their websites and
waiting in a queue) in the measured 90-second period. other online information. The remaining 40% became rude and
soon after that terminated the call, with one scammer setting a
The average number of volunteers who were able to speak
password to our virtualized OS before logging out.
with a scammer across all ten studied phone numbers was
11, with the smallest call-center housing 5 scammers, and the
E. Summary of findings
largest one 19. Our results show that scammers can belong
to various operations, ranging from small scale ones (call Through our interactions for over 22 hours with 60 scam-
centers with 5 or 6 people) all the way to call centers that mers, we were able to precisely quantify many aspects of
essentially occupied all of our volunteers (call centers with 18 this last part of technical support scams. We discovered that
or 19 people). As before, we argue that our method can be scammers abuse popular remote administration tools (81% of
straightforwardly operationalized by the FTC and other law- scammers rely on two specific software products), to gain
enforcement agencies, for identifying the largest players in the access to user machines where they then patiently attempt to
technical support scam ecosystem, and focusing on them first. convince users that they are infected with malware. We found
that, on average, a scammer takes 17 minutes, using multiple
Scammer Location. Even though scammers access a user’s
social engineering techniques mostly based on misrepresenting
machineviaaremoteadministrationtoolthattypicallyinvolves
OS messages, to convince users of their infections and then
a centralized server relaying commands between the user and
proceeds to request an average of $290.9 for repairing the
the scammer, it is possible that some tools still leak the
“infected” machines. We explained why we are convinced
scammer’s real IP address to the user. To discover whether
that most scammers operate out of call centers, estimated the
the remote administration tools utilized by scammers fit that
size of an average call center, and, using geolocation of the
description, we installed the tools on our machines and
collected network traces, we found that scammers are likely to
connected to them from another known IP address, while
be operating out of some specific countries, more than others.
capturing the network traffic. We then analyzed the traces
from our own connections and created packet signatures that
VI. DISCUSSIONANDFUTUREWORK
reveal the connecting user’s IP address.
Given our findings in Sections IV and V, we argue that
Using this method, we recovered the IP address of 41 out
technical support scams are a real and dangerous threat to the
ofthe60supportscams.BygeolocatingtheseIPaddresses,we
modern web. In contrast with other cybercrime methods, such
discoveredthat85.4%ofthemwerelocatedindifferentregions
as the stealing of credit card numbers and banking credentials,
of India, 9.7% were located in the US, and 4.9% were located
technicalsupportscamsdonotneedanyadditionalmonetization
in Costa Rica. While we cannot know with certainty that the
effortsince,ifthescamiseffective,thevictimizeduserswillbe
scammers were not using VPNs located in these countries,
willingly accepting the charges and voluntarily providing their
we argue that they most likely are not since the recovered IP
private and financial information, over the phone, to scammers.
addresses do not belong to known VPN providers but rather to
residential and corporate ISPs. In addition, the accent of the Even though systems that can automatically discover and
vast majority of the speakers with whom we interacted was detect these scams as soon as they arise, like ROBOVIC, are
12crucial, we opine that the threat of technical support scams beyond technical support scams, helping users quickly navigate
can only be comprehensively subdued with the education of awayfromwebsitesthattheyfindintrusive,suchasshocksites,
the public and additional help from browser vendors. In this as well as helping them defend against any webpage that is
section, we briefly describe these two areas of intervention and trying to forcefully keep them from navigating away.
discuss the limitations of our work.
Limitations. We identify two limitations of our work: i) the
User Education. User education has been a long-standing potential evasion of ROBOVIC’s detection heuristics, and ii)
problem of security mechanisms and its lack has often been the non-completeness of our sources for discovering technical
abused by attackers through social engineering. While certain support scam domains.
problems, e.g., the expiration of an SSL certificate, or the
First, we are well aware that, since we are operating in
problem of mixed inclusions, are admittedly hard to explain to
an adversarial environment, scammers may, as a result of
a non-technical person, we argue that explaining the concept of
our work, change their tactics to evade ROBOVIC’s current
technical support scams, is an easier endeavor. This is because,
detection heuristics. Note, however, that scammers do not have
in technical support scams, there are no exceptions that the
unlimited freedom in the techniques that they can use. Namely,
user must remember. A webpage cannot, by browser design,
if scammers want to trap a user’s browser, they must identify
know that a user is infected and should never be using a flood
blockingAPIs(suchasthecurrentlyabusedalertmethod)and
of alerts with threatening messages to communicate with users.
utilize those. Therefore, while an attacker could, for instance,
As such, educating the public that these pages should not be
use Flash to communicate their message (and therefore avoid
trustedishighlyunlikelytocauseharmtolegitimatebusinesses,
matching our keyword-based heuristics) they would risk users
even the ones involved in remote technical support.
just closing the offending tab. To account for language-based
Public service announcements are already used by multiple evasions, we are currently experimenting with a supervised
countries as a way of raising awareness for health and safety machine-learning-based classifier, similar to the ones used for
issues, and would be an ideal vehicle for educating users detectingspam.Thepremiseisthatthelanguagethatscammers
about the dangers and characteristic signs of technical support use (consisting of warnings, errors, threats, and viruses) is
scams. Even though the Internet Crime and Complaint Center different than the language of a typical webpage. We leave the
called its warning of technical support scams a “Public Service discussion of this classifier and its accuracy for future work.
Announcement” [1], the announcement was only available via
Second, we cannot unfortunately provide any guarantees of
specific websites and thus far from the reach of the general
completeness of our malvertising-driven discovery approach.
population.Atthesametime,eventhoughnon-technicalpeople
Such a guarantee would require information about the entire
can be educated to recognize technical support scams, we must
population of scammers and their traffic-delivering techniques,
alsoprovidethemwithasimplewayofnavigatingtheirbrowser
something that is likely infeasible. We chose to approach this
to safety, away from webpages that abuse blocking, browser-
problem pragmatically, by identifying malvertising as a key
provided APIs, such as the alert function, to keep users from
component of modern malware delivery and focusing on that.
navigating away.
The presence of tens of different domain-parking and url-
shortening services allows us to tap into multiple advertising
Browser Support. Given our reliance on the web, modern
networks which, in turn, exchange ads with even more smaller
browsers try to provide high availability to users and a large
networks. We argue that since ROBOVIC is able to discover so
degree of control to websites. In addition to blocking UIs, one
much more than exists in current blacklists (as measured in
specificfeaturethatis,ingeneral,desirablebuthasinadvertently
Section IV-E), we are, in fact, discovering a sizeable chunk of
become a tool in the hands of scammers is the remembering of
the true population of technical support scams.
opentabsinthecaseofacrash.Specifically,ifweassumethat,
a non-technical user is trapped on a technical support scam
VII. RELATEDWORK
page and, in a moment of desperation, reboots his machine,
the browser will remember all the open tabs, including the one Our study was inspired by a series of blog posts and a
withthe technicalsupportscam, uponreboot.As such,the user whitepaper from an antimalware company which qualitatively
willstillbetrappedandmuchmorelikelytocallthescammers. analyzed technical support scams [3]–[5]. While these, and
Tryingtooutrunalertdialoguesorkillingthebrowserprocess other blog posts have, in the past, analyzed a handful of scams,
and clearing recent history should not be something that we their studies are ad-hoc and their results are not generalizable.
expect from everyday users. To our knowledge, no blog post has ever produced a repeatable
methodology for finding scam pages in the wild, assessed the
To help users navigate to safety, we propose that browser
sufficiency(orlackthereof)ofexistingURLandphone-number
vendors could all adopt one universal shortcut that users can
blacklists, estimated the number of victims and the amount of
utilize when they feel threatened by a webpage. Depending on
money lost, or clustered phone numbers and their respective
the design, the browser can choose either to immediately close
domains, all using a corpus of thousands of domain names
the current tab, or close all tabs and navigate the browser to a
and phone numbers. Similarly, because of the ad-hoc nature
known safe page. The browser should ignore all event handlers
of their interviews with scammers, no one has ever reported
and provide no way that a webpage could detect its unloading
the distribution of the time that scammers take, the size of an
in time to launch a new window of the intruding webpage.
averagecallcenter,ortheamountofmoneythattheycharge,all
Ideally, this shortcut combination would be communicated to
of which can be of immediate use for prioritized take-downs.
the public through the aforementioned PSAs, allowing users
to both recognize and defend against technical support scams. In contrast with the aforementioned studies, our work is
Lastly,wewanttopointoutthatsuchashortcutcouldbeuseful the first systematic, quantitative study investigating technical
13support scams, by i) designing and deploying a distributed Gupta et al. described the architecture of a phone honeypot
crawling infrastructure for an 8-month period, ii) using this andpresentedtheintelligencegatheredbydeploying40Kphone
infrastructure to identify thousands of domains and phone numberswhichattracted1.3millioncallsoveraperiodofseven
numbers and analyzing their underlying infrastructure, and iii) weeks [55]. The authors discovered that older phone numbers
conducting a controlled, IRB-approved experiment to obtain attracted a higher number of calls than newer phone numbers,
precise information about the social engineering techniques and showed how the rate of calling can be used to differentiate
used by scammers and statistics about the process, the tools betweendifferenttypesofunwantedcalls,e.g.,theonesdoneby
used, the call-center infrastructures, and the amounts charged. atelemarketer,versusadebtcollector.Whiletheirsystemcould,
in principle, be used to discover the older variant of technical
Thoughwearenotawareofotherworkthathasinvestigated support scams (where unsuspecting users receive unsolicited
technical support scams, we argue that these scams are a cross- calls from scammers), the type of technical support scams that
over between traditional scareware, and scams perpetrated over we investigated in this paper needs an active component, such
the telephone [43] instead of over the Internet, such as vishing as ROBOVIC, to actively discover pages and numbers.
(VoicePhishing).Inamoregeneralsense,ourpaperbelongsto
the literature studying cybercrime and underground ecosystems
aimingtoshinelightonhiddenmechanisms,affiliatestructures,
VIII. CONCLUSION
infrastructure abuse, and possible technical and economical
In this paper, we reported on the first systematic investiga-
disruptions [7], [27], [44]–[47].
tionoftechnicalsupportscams.Bydesigningandimplementing
the first system capable of automatically discovering technical
Scareware. Scareware refers to software, typically fake AVs,
support scams, we collected a corpus of thousands of unique
which attempt to scare the user into performing one or more
domains and telephone numbers engaged in technical support
harmfulactions.Covaetal.[48]tracked6,500domainsinvolved
scams,clusteredthemincampaigns,andshowedthatscammers
in the distribution of fake AVs and discovered that 65% of the
abusespecificbrowserAPIstomakeithardforuserstonavigate
web servers behind these domains were exclusively serving
away from a technical support scam page. By interacting with
malicious content. The authors clustered multiple fake AVs as
60 different scammers for more than 22 hours, we precisely
part of the same campaign, with the largest campaign being
identified the social engineering techniques used, the remote
responsible for 23.5% of the 6,500 tracked domains. Rajab
administration tools abused, and the amount of money that
et al. [49] use Google’s SafeBrowsing data to discover over
scammers are charging. We presented evidence that places
11,000 domains offering fake AVs with up to 90% of the
technical support scammers in call centers in English-speaking
discovered scams relying on social engineering for getting
countries with low wages, showing that the ecosystem of
installed on a user’s computer. Stone-Gross et al. [6] approach
technicalsupportscamsiscomplexandcomprisedofmorethan
the phenomenon of fake antivirus software from an economic
one parties. Lastly, we discussed the need for user education
angle. The authors show that fake AV scammers can earn
andproposedasimplefeaturethatbrowservendorscouldadopt
hundreds of millions of dollars in antivirus license fees and
to assist users in navigating away from malicious pages.
discover the presence of affiliate networks where scammers
are paid a commission for each fake AV installation. Dietrich Acknowledgments:
et al. [50] describe how perceptual hashing could be used to We thank the reviewers for their valuable feedback and Linode
automatically cluster malware that depend on visual interfaces for providing us with virtual machines that made our large-
including fake antivirus programs and ransomware [51] scale experiments possible. This work was supported by the
Office of Naval Research (ONR) under grant N00014-16-1-
Telephone Scams. Maggi performed the first study of vishing 2264, by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under grants
by analyzing the data submitted by 360 users who had fallen CNS-1617902 and CNS-1617593, and by the Cyber Research
pray to vishing attacks and were willing to recount their Institute in Rome, New York.
experience [52]. In a later study, Costin et al. [53] investigated
the role of phone numbers in cybercrime and used phone
REFERENCES
numbers to cluster different types of scams, using data from
another crowdsourced website listing scams. The authors [1] “InternetCrimeComplaintCenter(IC3)—NewTwisttotheTelephone
utilized HRL (Home Register Location) queries and showed TechSupportScam,”http://www.ic3.gov/media/2014/141113.aspx,2014.
that the average scammer kept, almost always, their phone [2] J.Brodkin,“Aneverendingstory:PCusersloseanother$120Mtotech
supportscams,”http://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2014/11/
online. Unfortunately, HRL queries are only applicable to
ftc-windows-tech-support-scams-took-
mobilephones,thuswecannotutilizethemfortrackingtoll-free
another-120-million-from-pc-users/.
numbers. Christin et al. [54] analyzed a type of scam that was
[3] Malwarebytes Labs, “Tech Support Scams Help & Resource Page,”
mostly targeting Japanese users by threatening to reveal their https://blog.malwarebytes.org/tech-support-scams/,2013.
adultbrowsinghabitsiftheywouldnotpayacertainamountof
[4] ——, “PSA: Tech Support Scams Pop-Ups on the
moneytoscammers.Amongothers,theauthorstookadvantage Rise,” https://blog.malwarebytes.org/fraud-scam/2014/11/
of the phone numbers made available by scammers in order to psa-tech-support-scams-pop-ups-on-the-rise/,2014.
cluster multiple scams as part of larger campaigns. Note that [5] D.Harley,M.Grooten,S.Burn,andC.Johnston,“MyPChas32,539
in all three studies, the authors used publicly available data to errors: how telephone support scams really work,” in Virus Bulletin,
2012.
perform their analyses. Contrastingly, in this paper, because of
[6] B. Stone-Gross, R. Abman, R. A. Kemmerer, C. Kruegel, D. G.
the absence of available datasets, we designed and developed
Steigerwald,andG.Vigna,“Theundergroundeconomyoffakeantivirus
ROBOVIC,thefirsttoolabletoautomaticallydiscoverhundreds
software,” in Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Economics of
of instances of technical support scams on a weekly basis. InformationSecurity(WEIS),2011.
14[7] S.Hao,K.Borgolte,N.Nikiforakis,G.Stringhini,M.Egele,M.Eubanks, [32] “DNS-BH MalwareDomains,”http://www.malwaredomains.com/.
B.Krebs,andG.Vigna,“DropsforStuff:AnAnalysisofReshipping [33] “MDL:MalwareDomainList,”https://www.malwaredomainlist.com/.
MuleScams,”inProceedingsofthe22ndACMConferenceonComputer
[34] “Malc0deDatabase,”http://malc0de.com/database/.
andCommunicationsSecurity(CCS),2015.
[35] “TheSwissSecurityBlog,”https://www.abuse.ch/.
[8] L. Invernizzi, P. M. Comparetti, S. Benvenuti, C. Kruegel, M. Cova,
andG.Vigna,“Evilseed:Aguidedapproachtofindingmaliciousweb [36] “Apache Module mod status,” https://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/mod/
pages,”inIEEESymposiumonSecurityandPrivacy,2012. mod status.html.
[9] D.Pauli,“MalwaremenacespoisonadsasGoogle,Yahoo!lookaway,” [37] Mikael, @nsmfoo, “Modifying VirtualBox settings for
http://www.theregister.co.uk/2015/08/27/malvertising feature/. malware analysis 2013 ed,” http://blog.prowling.nu/2013/08/
modifying-virtualbox-settings-for.html,2013.
[10] J. Kirk, “Malicious advertisements on major sites compromised
many, many PCs,” http://www.pcworld.com/article/2879732/ [38] “Rev-Transcription,Captions,Translation,”https://www.rev.com/.
malicious-advertisements-on-major-sites- [39] “I worked at a tech support scam phone room AMA,”
compromised-many-computers.html,2015. https://www.reddit.com/r/AMA/comments/3766m1/i worked at
[11] Cyphort,“SpecialReport:TheRiseofMalvertising,”http://go.cyphort. a tech support scam phone room ama/,2015.
com/Malvertising-Report-15-Page.html. [40] “Average wages by country, in purchasing power
parity dollars,” http://www.statista.com/statistics/226956/
[12] Google’sAnti-MalvertisingTeam,“Anti-malvertising.com,”http://www.
average-world-wages-in-purchasing-power-parity-dollars/,2012.
anti-malvertising.com/.
[41] “CallCentersinIndia-CallCenterServicesProvidersCompaniesin
[13] Google,“Howwefoughtbadadsin2015,”https://googleblog.blogspot.
India,”http://www.callcentersindia.com/.
com/2016/01/better-ads-report.html.
[42] “CallCentersinIndia—OutsourceCallCenter-Outsource2india,”https:
[14] BingAds,“Lowqualityadsubmission&escalation,”http://advertise.
//www.outsource2india.com/why india/articles/call centers india.asp.
bingads.microsoft.com/en-us/report-spam-form.
[43] H. Tu, A. Doupe´, Z. Zhao, and G.-J. Ahn, “SoK: Everyone Hates
[15] S.Alrwais,K.Yuan,E.Alowaisheq,Z.Li,andX.Wang,“Understanding
Robocalls: A Survey of Techniques against Telephone Spam,” in
the Dark Side of Domain Parking,” in Proceedings of the USENIX
Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, May
SecuritySymposium,2014.
2016.
[16] T.Vissers,W.Joosen,andN.Nikiforakis,“ParkingSensors:Analyzing
[44] Y.Park,J.Jones,D.McCoy,E.Shi,andM.Jakobsson,“Scambaiter:
andDetectingParkedDomains,”inProceedingsofthe22ndNetwork
Understandingtargetednigerianscamsoncraigslist,”inProceedingsof
andDistributedSystemSecuritySymposium(NDSS),2015.
the21stNetworkandDistributedSystemSecuritySymposium(NDSS),
[17] B.Edelman,“Large-scaleregistrationofdomainswithtypographical 2014.
errors,”September2003.
[45] M.Motoyama,K.Levchenko,C.Kanich,D.McCoy,G.M.Voelker,
[18] Y.-M.Wang,D.Beck,J.Wang,C.Verbowski,andB.Daniels,“Strider andS.Savage,“Re:Captchas-understandingcaptcha-solvingservicesin
typo-patrol: discovery and analysis of systematic typo-squatting,” in aneconomiccontext.”inUSENIXSecuritySymposium,2010.
Proceedings of the 2nd conference on Steps to Reducing Unwanted
[46] C. Kanich, C. Kreibich, K. Levchenko, B. Enright, G. M. Voelker,
TrafficontheInternet,ser.SRUTI’06.
V.Paxson,andS.Savage,“Spamalytics:Anempiricalanalysisofspam
[19] T.MooreandB.Edelman,“Measuringtheperpetratorsandfundersof marketingconversion,”inProceedingsofthe15thACMConferenceon
typosquatting,”inFinancialCryptographyandDataSecurity,2010. ComputerandCommunicationsSecurity(CCS),2008.
[20] J.Szurdi,B.Kocso,G.Cseh,J.Spring,M.Felegyhazi,andC.Kanich, [47] K.SoskaandN.Christin,“Measuringthelongitudinalevolutionofthe
“The long “taile” of typosquatting domain names,” in 23rd USENIX onlineanonymousmarketplaceecosystem,”in24thUSENIXSecurity
SecuritySymposium(USENIXSecurity14),2014. Symposium,2015.
[21] P.Agten,W.Joosen,F.Piessens,andN.Nikiforakis,“Sevenmonths’ [48] M. Cova, C. Leita, O. Thonnard, A. D. Keromytis, and M. Dacier,
worth of mistakes: A longitudinal study of typosquatting abuse,” in “Ananalysisofrogueavcampaigns,”inRecentAdvancesinIntrusion
Proceedings of the 22nd Network and Distributed System Security Detection,2010.
Symposium(NDSS),2015.
[49] M.A.Rajab,L.Ballard,P.Mavrommatis,N.Provos,andX.Zhao,“The
[22] M. T. Khan, X. Huo, Z. Li, and C. Kanich, “Every second counts: noceboeffectontheweb:ananalysisoffakeanti-virusdistribution,”in
Quantifyingthenegativeexternalitiesofcybercrimeviatyposquatting,” USENIXworkshoponlarge-scaleexploitsandemergentthreats(LEET),
inProceedingsofthe36thIEEESymposiumonSecurityandPrivacy, 2010.
2015. [50] C. J. Dietrich, C. Rossow, and N. Pohlmann, “Exploiting visual
[23] N. Nikiforakis, F. Maggi, G. Stringhini, M. Z. Rafique, W. Joosen, appearance to cluster and detect rogue software,” in Proceedings of
C. Kruegel, F. Piessens, G. Vigna, and S. Zanero, “Stranger danger: the28thAnnualACMSymposiumonAppliedComputing,2013.
exploring the ecosystem of ad-based url shortening services,” in [51] A.Kharraz,W.Robertson,D.Balzarotti,L.Bilge,andE.Kirda,“Cutting
Proceedings of the 23rd International World Wide Web Conference the gordian knot: A look under the hood of ransomware attacks,” in
(WWW),2014. Proceedings of the 12th Conference on Detection of Intrusions and
[24] S.Englehardt,C.Eubank,P.Zimmerman,D.Reisman,andA.Narayanan, Malware&VulnerabilityAssessment(DIMVA),2015.
“OpenWPM:AnAutomatedPlatformforWebPrivacyMeasurement,” [52] F.Maggi,“Aretheconartistsback?apreliminaryanalysisofmodern
2015. phonefrauds,”inProceedingsofthe10thInternationalConferenceon
[25] “AWS — Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) - Scalable Cloud ComputerandInformationTechnology(CIT). IEEE,2010,pp.824–831.
Hosting,”https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/. [53] A.Costin,J.Isacenkova,M.Balduzzi,A.Francillon,andD.Balzarotti,
[26] “SSDCloudHosting-Linode,”https://www.linode.com. “Theroleofphonenumbersinunderstandingcyber-crimeschemes,”in
Proceedingsofthe11thInternationalConferenceonPrivacy,Security
[27] J.W.ClarkandD.McCoy,“ThereAreNoFreeiPads:AnAnalysisof
andTrust(PST),2013.
SurveyScamsasaBusiness.”inLEET,2013.
[54] N.Christin,S.S.Yanagihara,andK.Kamataki,“Dissectingoneclick
[28] S.Liu,I.Foster,S.Savage,G.M.Voelker,andL.K.Saul,“Whois
frauds,”inProceedingsofthe17thACMconferenceonComputerand
.com?:Learningtoparsewhoisrecords,”inProceedingsofthe2015
communicationssecurity. ACM,2010,pp.15–26.
ACMConferenceonInternetMeasurementConference,ser.IMC,2015.
[55] P.Gupta,B.Srinivasan,V.Balasubramaniyan,andM.Ahamad,“Phoney-
[29] “TollFreeNumbers.com: The Internet’s Toll Free Search Engine for
pot:Data-drivenunderstandingoftelephonythreats,”inProceedingsof
Vanity1-800Numbers,”http://www.tollfreenumbers.com.
the22ndNetworkandDistributedSystemSecuritySymposium(NDSS),
[30] “hpHostsOnline-Simple,Searchable&FREE!”https://www.hosts-file. 2015.
net/.
[31] “SANS:SuspiciousDomains,”https://isc.sans.edu/suspicious domains.
html.
15