Internet-scale Probing of CPS: Inference, Characterization and Orchestration Analysis
Claude Fachkha1,2, Elias Bou-Harb3, Anastasis Keliris1, Nasir Memon1, and Mustaque Ahamad1,4
1New York University (NYU) and NYU Abu Dhabi
2University of Dubai
3Florida Atlantic University
4Georgia Institute of Technology
Abstract—Although the security of Cyber-Physical Systems I. INTRODUCTION
(CPS) has been recently receiving significant attention from the
Critical infrastructure systems are indispensable to the
research community, undoubtedly, there still exists a substantial
broader health, safety, security, and economic well-being of
lackofacomprehensiveandaholisticunderstandingofattackers’
malicious strategies, aims and intentions. To this end, this modern society and governments. In recent years, many of
paper uniquely exploits passive monitoring and analysis of a these systems have been undergoing large-scale transforma-
newly deployed network telescope IP address space in a first tions with the infusion of new “smart” cyber-based tech-
attempt ever to build broad notions of real CPS maliciousness. nologies to improve their efficiency and reliability. These
Specifically,weapproachthisproblembyinferring,investigating, transitions are being driven by continual advances and cost-
characterizing and reporting large-scale probing activities that efficiencies in areas such as integrated networking, informa-
specifically target more than 20 diverse, heavily employed CPS
tion processing, sensing, and actuation. Hence increasingly,
protocols.Topermitsuchanalysis,weinitiallydeviseandevaluate
physicalinfrastructuredevicesandsystemsarebeingtaskedto
a novel probabilistic model that aims at filtering noise that is
co-exist and seamlessly operate in cyber-based environments.
embeddedinnetworktelescopetraffic.Subsequently,wegenerate
Indeed, tightly coupled systems that exhibit this level of
amalgamated statistics, inferences and insights characterizing
suchinferredscanningactivitiesintermsoftheirprobetypes,the integrated intelligence are often referred to as Cyber-Physical
distribution of their sources and their packets’ headers, among Systems (CPS) [1].
numerous others, in addition to examining and visualizing the Nowadays, CPS can be found in significantly diverse indus-
co-occurrence patterns of such events. Further, we propose and tries, including, but not limited to, aerospace, automotive,
empirically evaluate an innovative hybrid approach rooted in energy, healthcare and manufacturing. Undeniably, the de-
time-series analysis and context triggered piecewise hashing to velopment and adoption of such CPS will generate unique
infer,characterizeandclusterorchestratedandwell-coordinated
opportunitiesforeconomicgrowthandimprovementofquality
probing activities targeting CPS protocols, which are generated
of life [2]. For instance, in the transportation sector, CPS
from Internet-scale unsolicited sources.
would be rendered by interactive traffic control systems that
Ouranalysisandevaluations,whichdrawuponextensivenetwork
aim at creating the notion of zero-fatality highways through
telescope data observed over a recent one month period, demon-
strate a staggering 33 thousand probes towards ample of CPS automated accident prevention and congestion reduction [3].
protocols,thelackofinterestinUDP-basedCPSservices,andthe Further, in the healthcare sector, CPS would be perceived by
prevalence of probes towards the ICCP and Modbus protocols. wearable and implantable sensors for cost-effective healthcare
Additionally, we infer a considerable 74% of CPS probes that as well as timely disease diagnosis and prevention [4]. While
were persistent throughout the entire analyzed period targeting CPSendeavorgreatopportunities,thecomplexitywhicharises
prominent protocols such as DNP3 and BACnet. Further, we from the fusion of computational systems with physical pro-
uncover close to 9 thousand large-scale, stealthy, previously
cesses indeed hinders their utmost embracing [5]. Particularly,
undocumented orchestrated probing events targeting a number
within the context of security, these integrated systems yield
ofsuchCPSprotocols.Wevalidatethevariousoutcomesthrough
substantial challenges as new vulnerabilities manifest them-
cross-validationsagainstpubliclyavailablethreatrepositories.We
selves, leading to attack models that are fundamentally new,
concur that the devised approaches, techniques, and methods
provideasolidfirststeptowardsbettercomprehendingrealCPS and predominantly hard to infer, characterize, attribute, and
unsolicited objectives and intents. analyze [6]. In turn, these gaps pose immense risks to the
physical integrity and operation of critical infrastructures.
Indeed,historicaleventsconfirmthatindustrialcontrolsystems
have long been the target of disruptive cyber attacks. A few
examples include the exploitation of a security flow in the
control system of Diesel Generators at Idaho National Labo-
ratories[7]andtheprominentStuxnetmalware,whichtargeted
a critical uranium enriching facility, triggering immense plant
Permission to freely reproduce all or part of this paper for noncommercial damage and even endangering human life [8]. Moreover, in
purposes is granted provided that copies bear this notice and the full citation
March 2016, the U.S. Industrial Control Systems-Computer
on the first page. Reproduction for commercial purposes is strictly prohibited
without the prior written consent of the Internet Society, the first-named author Emergency Response Team discovered an ongoing malware-
(for reproduction of an entire paper only), and the author’s employer if the orchestrated campaign targeting critical infrastructure. The
paper was prepared within the scope of employment. same campaign was inferred to be responsible for the massive
NDSS ’17, 26 February - 1 March 2017, San Diego, CA, USA
power outage that struck Ukraine in December 2015 [9]. In
Copyright 2017 Internet Society, ISBN 1-891562-46-0
http://dx.doi.org/10.14722/ndss.2017.23149 the same context, given the rapid transformation of industrialcontrol systems towards CPS-based setups, attacks are indeed spaces. To this end, we study their overall trends, abuse
anticipated to increase in frequency, sophistication and target per protocol, probes’ co-occurrences, source countries and
diversity. In fact, the latter trend was even recently confirmed employed protocols, among various others. Additionally, we
by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS), as propose an innovative hybrid approach rooted in temporal
they reported thousands of highly-tailored and specifically analysisandcontexttriggeredpiecewisehashingtoinfer,char-
engineered CPS attacks targeting diverse sectors [10]. acterize and report on previously undocumented orchestrated
Whileaplethoraofresearchefforts,fromboth,thecontroland and well-coordinated probing activities targeting a number of
cyberperspectiveshavebeendedicatedtotacklingthesecurity CPS protocols.
ofCPS(pleaserefertoSectionII),therestillexistsasignificant • Validating the proposed models, methods and approaches
gap,whichisrenderedbythelackofproperlycomprehending by experimenting with 50 GB of darknet data, in addition
and accurately characterizing malicious attackers’ capabilities, to relying on corroborations against publicly available threat
intents and aims, when targeting such systems. This is largely repositories.
due to the lack of real malicious empirical data that can be
The road-map of this paper is organized as follows. In the
captured, inferred, and analyzed from within the boundaries
nextsection,wediscussrelatedworksintermsofCPSsecurity
of operational CPS realms [11, 12]. Thus, without having
approaches, probing analysis and traffic measurements. In
accesstosuchcriticalinformation,itispracticallyinfeasibleto
SectionIII,weelaborateonourproposedapproaches,methods
elaborate effective security approaches which aim at inferring,
and techniques. The corresponding evaluations, inferences
attributingormitigatingtangibleCPSattacks.Indeed,thegoal
and validations are presented in Section IV. We provide a
which endeavors to capture notions of “true maliciousness” in
discussion in Section V, while Section VI summarizes this
the context of CPS is significantly challenging, due to many
paperandpinpointsanareathatpavesthewayforfuturework.
factors, including, (1) the lack of complete maturity and the
scarcityofelaborativetechnicaldetailsrelatedtoCPS[13],(2)
the significant diversity of such types of systems which exist
II. RELATEDWORK
in numerous sectors, and (3) logistic and privacy constraints
In this section, we review the literature by providing two
whichareoftenstrictlyenforcedbyCPSownersandoperators.
distinct taxonomies in the context of CPS security approaches
Therefore, it is evident that auxiliary cyber threat intelligence
from both, the physical/control perspective as well as from
approaches are required in order to contribute to better grasp-
the cyber security perspective. We further extend this section
ing the notions of CPS maliciousness. While instrumenting
by elaborating on probing analysis and traffic measurement
malicious payloads inferred from CPS vulnerabilities [14] and
studies. The aim is to shed the light on the state-of-the-art of
concepts related to CPS honeypots have emerged and have
thoseresearchareas,inadditiontopinpointingvariousresearch
been investigated [15], this paper takes a complementary yet
gaps, which this paper intends to address and/or examine to
a unique step towards this goal. To this end, we offer a first
pave the way for future work.
comprehensive analysis of probing activities that specifically
target ample of CPS communication and control protocols
A. CPS Security: Control-theoretic Approaches
by exclusively monitoring and characterizing network traffic
targetinganewlydeployednetworktelescopeIPaddressspace The analysis of CPS security from a control-theoretic
(i.e.,unsolicitedInternettraffictargetingroutable,allocatedyet perspective has undoubtedly received considerable attention.
unused Internet Protocol (IP) addresses) [16]. In this context, Table I provides a brief taxonomy, due to space limitations,
we study various dimensions related to such misdemeanors highlighting some fundamental and representative works in
andexaminetheoccurrenceandorchestrationpatternsofsuch this area. In a nutshell, this taxonomy captures the modeled
abused services. Indeed, the presented work is innovative systems, whether or not noise has been considered in the
and transformative in its capacity to design, implement and approach, the analyzed attack model and its corresponding
evaluateautomatedapproachesthataimatdisclosingrealCPS detection scheme. Such research works consider the system
attackers’strategies,bypassivelyinferring,characterizing,and dynamics from a physical point of view to perform their
correlating CPS probing events. In summary, we frame the analysis.Forinstance,inthepowergridcontext,Liuetal.[17]
paper’s contributions in the following three threads: investigated false data injection attacks by inserting arbitrary
errors into sensor measurements. The authors analyzed two
• Proposing a formal preprocessing probabilistic model that attack scenarios, where the attacker is either constrained to
aims at filtering noise (i.e., misconfiguration traffic) that is some specific meters, or limited in the resources required to
embedded in darknet data to prepare it for effective use. The compromise meters. For each scenario, algebraic conditions
model is advantageous as it does not rely on arbitrary cut-off are derived to validate the existence of stealthy attack vectors,
thresholds, provides different likelihood models to distinguish whichdonotyieldanychangetotheresidue.Inanalternative
between misconfiguration and other darknet traffic, and is in- work, Pasqualetti et al. [19] analyzed attacks on sensors and
dependent from the nature of the source of the traffic. Further, actuators by considering a generic continuous-time control
the proposed model neatly captures the natural behavior of system.Inparticular,theauthorsmathematicallycharacterized
misconfiguration traffic as it targets the darknet. To the best certain conditions that provided the probability of detecting
ofourknowledge,thepresentedmodelpresentsafirstattempt suchattacks,givenasetofknownvulnerabilities.Theauthors
ever to systematically fingerprint and thus filter-out darknet further introduced the notion of attack detectability by design-
misconfiguration traffic. ingcentralizedanddistributedfiltersrootedinarithmeticlogic
• Inferring, characterizing and executing multidimensional ofdescriptorsystems.Intheareaofdistributedcontrolsystems
investigation of probing activities targeting more than 20 CPS security, Pajic et al. [21] analyzed the impact of malicious
protocols by passively monitoring 7 /24 network telescope nodes in the context of a wireless control network. The
2TypeofSystem Noise AttackModels DefenseMechanisms Reference
PowerGrid (cid:88) Falsedatainjectiononsensors Residuedetector [17]
PowerGrid (cid:88) Falsedatainjectiononsensors Residuedetector [18]
ControlSystem - Attacksonsensors&actuators Detectionfilters [19]
ControlSystem - Attacksonsensors&actuators Optimizationdecoders [6]
ControlSystem (cid:88) Replayattack χ2 detector [20]
WirelessNetwork - Stateattacks Outputestimator [21]
DistributedNetwork - Stateattacks Combinatorialestimator [22]
SensorNetwork (cid:88) DynamicFalsedatainjection Residuedetector [23]
TABLE I: A brief taxonomy of CPS security approaches from a control-theoretic perspective
authors designed and assessed the effectiveness of a detector synthetic data demonstrated that the proposed approach is
based on an approach that aims at estimating sensor outputs. abletoaccuratelymodelnormaltraffic,flagcertaindeviations,
Alternatively, Mo et al. [23] considered a data injection attack and reduce the false positive rate. From another perspective,
on a noisy wireless sensor network. The attack was modeled severalresearchworksinvestigatedsecureapproachesforCPS
asaconstrainedoptimalcontrolprobleminwhichtheKalman software and memory resources. For instance, McLaughlin et
filter was used to perform state estimation, while a failure al. [28] proposed an approach to verify safety-critical code
detector was leveraged to detect anomalies in the system. In executed on programmable controllers. The devised approach
addition to the above, Teixeira et al. [24] have introduced and initially checks such code against a set of physically safe
modeled a combination of different attack scenarios such as measures and subsequently present case studies of abuse in
falsedatainjections,replay,andzero-dynamics’attacks,where caseofanyinferredinconsistencies.Inthiscontext,theauthors
adversarialactivitiesattempttocausedamagetothecontrolled introduced the notion of temporal execution graph, which
system while remaining stealthy. To this end, active detection illustrates the consequences of a certain untrusted executed
methods have been proposed to infer related attacks through code. The proposed approach was validated in terms of its
analyzing and manipulating the system dynamics. A few of capability to enforce certain common safety properties by
those methods, include, a physical watermarking scheme to meansofexperimentationinanemulatedenvironment.Several
authenticate the nominal behavior of a control system [25] other research initiatives exploited CPS process variables for
and a moving target approach [26] to detect integrity attacks. anomaly detection. For example, Hadzˇiosmanovic´ et al. [11]
extracted process variables from a CPS plant to build pre-
Indeed,therationalebehindtheaforementionedsubstantial
dictability models. By leveraging simple regression models,
control-theoretic CPS security contributions is based upon
the authors alerted CPS plant operators of any deviation
existingmodelsthatpreciselydescribetheunderlyingphysical
in the expected parameters as an indicator of an ongoing
phenomena, which enables the prediction of future behavior
attack. From a data analytics perspective, Almalawi et al.
and, more importantly, unforeseen deviations from it. To this
[29] presented a machine learning approach to infer CPS
end, we argue that such approaches (1) do not provide any
attacks. By employing an unsupervised clustering mechanism
concrete evidence that such deviations are in fact originated
based on the k-means algorithm, the proposed approach aims
from malicious entities, (2) depict attackers’ models in a
at distinguishing between consistent and inconsistent CPS
highly-theoretic manner, which do not necessarily reflect the
observations.Simulationswereconductedtovalidatetheeffec-
behavior of real CPS attacks and (3) provide experimentation
tiveness of the devised approach. Within the same category of
and evaluations that were executed in emulated or simulated
research works but from an industrial/operational perspective,
CPS environments, without much endeavors being dedicated
the security community supporting the open source intrusion
to real-world applications.
detection system Snort [30] has also offered and contributed
tovariousCPSdetectionrules[31].Thelatteraimatinferring
B. CPS Security: Cyber Security Approaches
unauthorized requests, malformed packets and rarely used and
Complementary to the above, the cyber security research suspicious CPS protocol commands.
community has also offered various approaches in an attempt
to tackle numerous security aspects of CPS. Such approaches Whilethesurveyedresearchworksoffersignificantcontri-
characteristically put less emphasis on the control system butions,nevertheless,wecanextract(1)thegeneralinadequacy
dynamics by essentially focusing on the cyber (i.e., com- of research attempts to systematically combine or at least
munication networks, protocols, data, etc.) perspective. We diminish the gap between cyber and control capabilities for
classify a number of such fundamental approaches into four securingCPS,(2)thelackofempiricaldatarelatedtotangible
corecategoriesassummarizedinTableIIandwesubsequently malicious CPS attacks and strategies that are generated from
discuss only a few of them, due to space limitations. In real unsolicited attackers, which could realistically affect the
the context of modeling CPS protocols, Yoon et al. [27] stability and security of CPS, (3) the deficiency of CPS
proposed the use of message sequences derived from CPS security approaches in providing, both, attribution evidence
communication traffic to capture legitimate plant behavior. andthreatseveritymetricsand(4)thelackofsuchapproaches
To accomplish the latter task, the authors employed a dy- in providing means for CPS resiliency in the physical realm
namic Bayesian network and a probabilistic suffix tree as during or immediately after an attack. Our presented work
the underlying predictive model. Executed evaluations using that falls within this category of research works aims at
3AnalysisPerspective Highlights References
ProtocolVulnerabilities ModelingCPSprotocolstodetectanomalies [27,32–36]
PLCSoftware VerifyingPLCcodeandmemorytopreventviolations [28,37–40]
ProcessVariables PredictingCPSprocessbehaviortodetectanomalies [11,14,41,42]
DataAnalytics Data-drivenapproachestoinferCPScyberattacks [29,31,43–45]
TABLE II: A brief classification of CPS security approaches from a cyber security perspective
contributing to point (2) by providing a first thorough look exploited poorly protected Internet devices, developed and
in terms of insights and inferences related to CPS attackers’ distributed a custom binary, to generate one of the largest and
reconnaissance strategies, by investigating unsolicited darknet most comprehensive IPv4 census ever.
data. In this work, we extend previous research contributions to
identify a new threat vector; unsolicited sources employing
Internet-scalescansinanattempttofingerprintnumerousCPS
C. Probing Analysis
resources. To this end, we devise and implement innovative
methodsandtechniques,andapplythemonnetworktelescope
In the context of inferring probing events, Li et al. [46]
datatoperformacomprehensivemeasurementandanalysisof
considered large spikes of unique source counts as probing
a broad list of CPS communication and control protocols.
events. The authors extracted those events from network tele-
scopetrafficusingtimeseriesanalysis;theyfirstautomatically
identified and extracted the rough boundaries of events and D. Network Telescope: Measurements & Analysis
then manually refined the event starting and ending times.
The idea of monitoring unused IP addresses for security
At this point, they used manual analysis and visualization
purposes was first brought to light in the early 1990s by
techniques to extract the event. In an alternate work, Jin et al.
Bellovin for AT&T’s Bell Labs Internet-connected computers
[47]consideredanyincomingflowthattouchesanytemporary
[57,58].However,thetopicoftelescopedataanalysisreceived
dark (grey) IP address as potentially suspicious. The authors
further attention after year 2000 [59]. Since then, the focus
narrowed down the flows with sustained suspicious activities
of network telescope studies has shifted several times, closely
and investigated whether certain source or destination ports
followingthevolatilenatureofnewthreatactors.Forinstance,
are repeatedly used in those activities. Using these ports, the
some of the important contributions that demonstrate the
authors separated probing activities of an outside host from
evolution of telescope research include the discovery of the
other traffic that is generated from the same host. In the
relationship between backscatter traffic and DDoS attacks in
area of analyzing probing events, the authors of [47, 48]
2001[60],wormpropagationanalysisbetween2003and2005
studied probing activities towards a large campus network
[61, 62], the use of time series and data mining techniques
using netflow data. Their goal was to infer the probing strate-
on telescopetraffic in2008 [63],the monitoring oflarge-scale
gies of scanners and thereby assess the harmfulness of their
cybereventsthroughtelescopein2012[64],andmorerecently,
actions.TheyintroducedthenotionofgrayIPspace,developed
the study of amplification attacks using telescope sensors in
techniques to identify potential scanners, and subsequently
2013 and 2014 [65, 66].
studied their scanning behaviors. In another work, the authors
In contrast, this work proposes and evaluates a formal proba-
of [46, 49] presented an analysis that drew upon extensive
bilisticpreprocessingmodelfornetworktelescopetrafficinan
honeynet data to explore the prevalence of different types
effort to fingerprint and filter out misconfiguration traffic. We
of scanning. Additionally, they designed mathematical and
believe that this proposed model is of significant value, given
observational schemes to extrapolate the global properties of
its postulated highly applicable nature in the field of Internet
scanningeventsincludingtotalpopulationandtargetscope.In
measurements.
the context of probing measurement studies, Benoit et al. [50]
presentedtheworld’sfirstWebcensuswhileHeidemannetal.
E. CPS Traffic Analysis
[51] were among the first to survey edge hosts in the visible
Internet. Further, Pryadkin et al. [52] offered an empirical CPSnetworktrafficmonitoringandanalysiscanbedivided
evaluation of IP address space occupancy whereas Cui and in two main categories, namely, interactive monitoring and
Stolfo [53] presented a quantitative analysis of the insecurity passive monitoring. On one hand, honeypots are an example
ofembeddednetworkdevicesobtainedfromawide-areascan. oflow-tohigh-interactivetrap-basedmonitoringsystems[67].
Additionally, Durumeric et al. [54] investigated darknet traffic The first CPS honeypot, known as the SCADA HoneyNet
to analyze the current practices of Internet-wide scanning. Project,wasdesignedanddeployedin2004byCiscoSystems
They generated cyber threat intelligence related to sources [68]. Digital Bond, a company that specializes in CPS cyber-
of scanning activity and probed services, among others. The security, deployed two SCADA honeypots in 2006 [69]. The
authors also elaborated on some defensive mechanisms and release of Conpot in 2013 has greatly facilitated the deploy-
provided several insightful recommendations when executing ment and management of CPS honeypots [15]. While such
such activities for research purposes. Furthermore, Dainotti et honeypots provide an effective mechanism to generate real
al.[55]presentedapioneeringmeasurementandanalysisstudy CPS attack models, they indeed suffer from two drawbacks.
of a 12-day Internet-wide probing campaign targeting VoIP First, improper deployment of honeypots may introduce se-
(SIP) servers, while an “anonymous” presented and published curity risks (i.e., malware escaping the honeypot sandbox and
online [56] what they dubbed as the Carna botnet. The author propagatingtotheproductionnetwork).Second,honeypotsare
4only effective if they are not detected; there exist substantial Let D = {d ,d ,d ,···} represent the set of darknet IP
1 2 3
evidence that honeypots can be relatively easily fingerprinted addresses and D a subset of those accessed by source s .
i i
[70, 71]. In terms of passive analysis, such methods include First, the model captures how unusual the accessed destina-
the study of network telescope traffic to generate statistics tions are. The idea behind this metric stems from the fact
and trends related to various inferred CPS misdemeanors. The that misconfigured sources access destinations that have been
firstlimitedreportednetworktelescopestudywhichaddressed accessedbyfewothersources[73].Thus,themodelestimates
the security of CPS protocols was conducted in 2008 by the distribution of a darknet IP d being accessed by such a
i
Team Cymru [72]. Their report included coarse statistics on source as
scans targeting commonly used CPS protocols such as DNP3,
P (d )=
n s(d i)
, (1)
Modbus and Rockwell-encap. misc i (cid:88)
n (d )
Inthiswork,inadditiontoprovidingathoroughmeasurement s j
and analysis study of probing traffic targeting ample of CPS ∀dj∈D
protocols, we further propose, evaluate and validate a novel
wheren (d )isthenumberofsourcesthathaveaccessedd .In
s i i
approach to infer and report orchestrated, stealthy and previ-
contrast,amaliciousdarknetsourcewillaccessadestinationat
ously undocumented probing activities targeting a number of
random. Typically, defining a suitable probability distribution
CPS protocols.
to model the randomness of a malicious source targeting a
specific darknet destination is quite tedious; often a simplistic
III. PROPOSEDAPPROACH
assumptionisappliedtosolvethisissue.Inthiscontext,avery
In this section, we elaborate on the devised models, ap- recent work by Durumeric et al. [54] has demonstrated that
proaches and methods that aim at (1) cleansing darknet data darknet sources will probe their targets following a Gaussian
to prepare it for effective use, (2) inferring and characterizing distribution1.Byadoptingthatassumption,onecanmodelthe
CPS probing traffic and (3) identifying orchestrated CPS probability of a darknet destination accessed by a malicious
probing campaigns. source as
1
P (d )= √
e−(x−µ)2/2σ2
, (2)
mal i
A. Darknet Preprocessing Model σ 2π
Although darknet data mostly contains malicious packets where σ is the standard deviation, µ is the mean, σ2 is
originatingfromprobes,backscatteredpacketsfromvictimsof the variance and x is the location of the darknet destination
distributed denial of service attacks and malware propagation following the distribution. Recall that equations (1) and (2)
attempts, among others, it might also include what is dubbed allow the model to initially capture how unusual the accessed
as misconfiguration traffic. The latter non-malicious packets destinations are. However, further, the model considers how
might be caused by network/routing or hardware/software many darknet destinations have been accessed by a given
faults that were erroneously directed towards a darknet. Such source. The latter will be subsequently described.
traffic can also be an artifact of an improper configuration
Given a set of D , darknet destinations accessed by a
when deploying a darknet. Indeed, misconfiguration traffic i
specificsources ,themodeleventuallyaimsatmeasuringtwo
“pollutes” darknet data as such traffic can not be exploited i
probability distributions, namely, P (D ) and P (D ).
for cyber threat intelligence. Further, misconfiguration traffic misc i mal i
The former being the probability that D has been generated
makes it harder for cyber threat intelligence algorithms to i
by a misconfigured source while the latter is the probability
operate correctly on darknet data, which often yields to nu-
that D has been generated by a malicious darknet source.
merousundesirablefalsepositivesandfalsenegatives.Another i
drawback of the existence of misconfiguration traffic within
Let D = {d ,d ,d } be those darknet addresses
1 i1 i2 i3
darknet data, is that it wastes valuable storage resources.
accessed by s . The model captures the probability P(D ) of
1 1
Therefore, in this section, we elaborate on the proposed the source generating {d i1,d i2,d i3} as the probability of s 1
probabilistic model that is particularly tailored towards the accessing this specific combination of destinations knowing
goal of preprocessing darknet data by fingerprinting and thus that it targeted three destinations multiplied by the probability
filtering out misconfiguration traffic. of s 1 accessing any three destinations. The latter could be
generalized and formalized as
In a nutshell, the model formulates and computes two
metrics that aim at capturing the natural and the characteristic
P(D)=P(D ={d ,d ,··· ,d } | |D|=n)×P(|D|=n). (3)
behaviorofmisconfigurationflowsastheytargetthedarknetIP i i i1 i2 in i i
space. The model initially estimates the “rareness of access”;
the degree to which access to a given darknet IP address is For both, a misconfigured and a malicious source, the first
unusual. The model further considers the “scope of access”; term of equation (3) could be modeled as
thenumberofdistinctdarknetIPaddressesthatagivenremote
(cid:89)
source has accessed. Subsequently, the joint probability is P (D ={d ,d ,···} | |D |)= 1 P (d ) (4)
misc i i1 i2 i K misc i
formulated, computed and compared. If the probability of the ∀dj∈Di
source generating a misconfiguration is higher than that of
the source being malicious (or unsolicited), then the source 1In the presence of Network Address Translation (NAT), different IP
is deemed as one that is generating misconfiguration traffic, addresses that are simultaneously probing and generating misconfiguration
traffic would cause the distribution to be non-Gaussian. This might lead
subsequently flagged, and its corresponding generated darknet
to falsely attributing probing traffic as misconfiguration. While we can not
flows are filtered out. The above two metrics are elaborated
deny or validate this scenario, future work could investigate the empirical
next. distributionofsuchphenomenatofilteritout.
5Algorithm 1 Inferring misconfiguration flows using the prob-
abilistic model
(cid:89)
P mal(D i ={d i1,d i2,···} | |D i|)= K1 P mal(d i) (5) 1: Input:DarknetFlows,DarkFlows
∀dj∈Di 2: Output:Flag,MiscFlag,indicatingthattheDarkFlowisoriginatingfrom
amisconfiguredsource
where K, a normalization constant which is solely employed 3:
to allow the probabilities to sum to 1, could be defined as 4: forDarkFlowsdo
5: MiscFlag←0
6: i←DarkFlows.getUniqueSources()
K =
n!(|D|D || −!
n)!
×
|D1
|n. (6)
7 8:
:
A Um pda al tg eam sia (t De iD )arkFlowsi originatingfromaspecificsourcesi
9: ComputePmisc(Di),P mal(Di)
10: ifPmisc(Di)>P mal(Di)then
Please note that K is a typical normalization constant 11: MiscFlag←1
that is often employed in Bayesian probability [74]. Further, 12: endif
13: endfor
n represents all the sources in the data set, while |D|, as
previously mentioned, represents the darknet IP space.
The likelihood that a source will target a certain number To effectively employ the proposed darknet preprocessing
of darknet destinations (i.e., the second term of equation (3)) model, we present Algorithm 1, which provides a simplistic
depends on whether the source is malicious or misconfigured. yet effective mechanism to infer misconfigured sources by
Characteristically, misconfigured sources access one or few employing the model. It is worthy to note that step 9 of the
destinations while malicious sources access a larger pool of algorithm (i.e., the computation of P (D ) and P (D ))
misc i mal i
destinations. We have modeled such distributions as is easily accomplished in practice by computing the negative
log-likelihoods,
1
P (|D |)= (7)
misc i (e−1)|D |!
i L (D )=−lnP (D )
misc i misc i
(11)
L (D )=−lnP (D ).
mal i mal i
1
P (|D |)= (8)
mal i |D| Thus, Algorithm 1 deems a source and its corresponding
flows as misconfiguration traffic if L (D ) − L (D ) >
mal i misc i
where the term (e − 1) in equation (7) guarantees that 0.
the distribution will sum to 1. It is noteworthy to mention
that equation (7) ensures that the probability will significantly B. CPS Probing Inference & Characterization
decrease as the number of targeted destinations increases. In
ToinferCPSprobingactivitiesafterpreprocessingdarknet
contrast, equation (8) captures a malicious darknet source
data by exploiting the previously proposed model, we present
accessing a random number of darknet addresses.
Algorithm 2, which exploits both packet header information
By combining the above equations, we can model the and flow-based parameters.
probabilityofasourcebeingmisconfiguredormalicious,given
Algorithm 2 operates on darknet flows, which are defined
a set of darknet destination addresses, as
by a series of consecutive packets sharing the same source
IP address. First, each flow is scrutinized to verify if its
corresponding packets contain any service ports that can
1 (cid:89)
P (D )= P (d ) (9) effectively pinpoint to CPS darknet activities. The algorithm
misc i K(e−1)|D |! misc i
i ∀dj∈Di monitorstraffictoacomprehensivelistofmostprominentand
widely-deployedCPScommunicationandcontrolprotocolsas
1 (cid:89) summarized in Table III2. Such table includes, both, private
P mal(D i)=
K|D|
P mal(d i). (10) (i.e.,Siemens,GENe,etc.)andwell-knownCPSservices(i.e.,
∀dj∈Di Modbus, ICCP, etc.).
If no CPS ports were found, the algorithm deems that
It is imperative to note that equations (9) and (10) provide
specific flow as not related to CPS activities. On the contrary,
two distinct likelihood models to distinguish between miscon-
if a service port was found, Algorithm 2 deems that flow as
figuration and other malicious darknet traffic. This permits
suspicious, and consequently moves forward in an attempt
the simplified and systematic post-processing of the latter two
to assert that suspicion. Subsequently, the algorithm counts
types of darknet traffic. Moreover, as the model generalizes
the number of packets per flow to measure the rate of the
and formalizes the concepts of misconfiguration and other
suspicious activities within a certain time window (Tw). If the
malicious darknet traffic, the proposed model does not make
flow packet count (pkt cnt) is beyond a specific threshold, the
any assumptions related to the nature of the sources of those
flow is deemed as a CPS probe. To this end, we borrow the
types of traffic. For example, the model is agnostic to whether
packetcountthresholdfrom[75],definedby64probeddarknet
the malicious (or unsolicited) traffic is generated by a worm
addresses on the same port on any given day. Please note,
or a probing tool, or whether the misconfiguration is caused
by a malfunctioning Internet router or an invalid connection 2ObtainedthroughdiscussionswithstateandfederalCPSoperatorsinthe
request. power,water,aviationandcriticalmanufacturingsectors.
6Algorithm 2 CPS Scanning Inference Algorithm performance perspective, when implemented “on the fly” on
thedarknetdatastream,thealgorithmcansuccessfullyprocess
1: Input:Aset(F)ofuniquedarknetflows(f),
2: Eachflowf containspacketcount(pkt cnt)andrate(rate) and reason about a significant 10,000 flows in 55 seconds, on
SP:CPSServicePort average.
Tw:Timewindow
Pth:Packetthreshold AfterinferringCPSprobingactivities,wecharacterizeand
Rth:Ratethreshold, profile their inferred flows to investigate their significance and
Tn:Timeofpacketnumberninaflow
prevalence, recent trends and orchestration behavior. We gen-
pkt:Packet
Output:CPSflag,CPS flag erateamalgamatedstatisticsrelatedtothecategoriesofprobes,
3: thedistributionofdifferenttypesofscanswithineachcategory,
4: forEachf inF do thedistributionoftransportprotocolsusedinthescansandthe
5: whilepktinf do
timeseriesofvarioustypesofprobes.Furthermore,weattempt
6: ifpkt.contains()!=SPthen
to understand the behavior of these probes by studying and
7: CPS flag()←0
8: endif analyzing the similarity and co-occurrence patterns of their
9: ifpkt.contains()=SPthen sources. To this end, we execute the following procedure. In
10: CPS flag()←1 order to investigate whether the same CPS scanning sources
11: endif
areprevalentondifferenttimeperiods,weformalizetheprobes
12: endwhile
13: as a set of unordered collection of IP addresses that represent
14: pkt cnt←0 scanners observed on a daily basis. Subsequently, we define
15: T1←pkt gettime() the sets, A , (where i = 1,2...,n), where each set is indexed
i
16: Tf ←T1+Tw
by the day number. We compute the similarity between two
17: whilepktinf do
sets, A and A , represented by S(A ,A ). The similarity has
18: Tn=pkt gettime() i j i j
19: ifTn<Tf then the following properties: (1) It is in the range [0,1]; (2) the
20: pkt cnt←pkt cnt+1 higher the value is, the more source probing IP addresses are
21: endif shared among the sets, and thus the largest is the similarity,
22: endwhile
23: rate← pktcnt and vice versa; (3) it is equal to 1, if the sets are the same;
24: ifpkt cnt<Tw Pth||rate<Rththen and(4)itisequalto0,ifthesetsdonotshareIPaddressesor
25: CPS flag()←0 one (or both) of the sets is empty. To compute such similarity,
26: endif we leverage the Jaccard index, a statistical technique used in
27: endfor
comparingsimilaritiesanddiversitiesamongsamplesets[76].
This index is defined by:
CPSCommunication PortNumber Type |A (cid:84) A |
&ControlProtocols S(A ,A )= i j (12)
ABBRanger2003 10307/10311/10364,etc. Registered i j |A (cid:83) A |
i j
BACnet/IP 47808 Registered
DNP/DNP3 19999/20000 Registered where |A (cid:84) A | denotes the cardinality of the intersection
Emerson/FisherROCPlus 4000 Registered i j (cid:83)
EtherCAT 34980 Registered between the sets and |A i A j| denotes the cardinality of the
EtherNet/IP 2222/44818 Registered union between the sets.
FL-netReception/Transmission 55000-55003 Dynamic/Private
FoundationFieldbusHSE 1089/1090/1091 Registered
Foxboor/InvensysFoxboroDCS 55550 Dynamic/Private
IconicGenesis32GenBroker 18000 Registered
C. CPS Probing Orchestration Fingerprinting
ICCP 102 Well-known
IEC-104 2404 Registered
JohnsonControlsMetasysN1 11001 Registered In recent years, there has been a noteworthy shift towards
Modbus 502 Well-known a new phenomenon of probing events that could be dubbed
MQTelemetryTransport 1883 Registered
as probing campaigns. These are distinguished from previous
NiagaraFox 1911/4911 Registered
OPCUADiscoveryServer 3480 Registered probing incidents as (1) the population of the participating
OSIsoftPIServer 5450 Registered bots is several orders of magnitude larger, (2) the target
PROFINET 34962/24963/34964 Registered
Project/SCADANodePrimaryPort 4592 Registered scope is generally the entire IP address space, and (3) the
RedLion 789 Well-known sources adopt well-orchestrated, often botmaster-coordinated,
ROCPlus 4000 Registered
stealth scan strategies that maximize targets’ coverage while
SCADANodePorts 4592/14592 Registered
SiemensSpectrumPowerTG 50001/50018/50020,etc. Dynamic/Private minimizing redundancy and overlap [55, 56]. In this section,
SNCGENe 62900/62911/62924,etc. Dynamic/Private we build upon our darknet preprocessing model as well as
TelventOASySDNA 5050/5052/5065,etc. Registered
ourCPSprobes’inferencealgorithmbyproposingaclustering
TABLE III: List of CPS protocols and corresponding ports approach to infer CPS probing campaigns. This aims at better
comprehendingthenaturesaswellasthetypeofmaliciousness
of such campaigns; for instance, it could be found, through
investigation, that a specific campaign is specialized in tar-
that typically, the probing engine would have also required geting particular critical infrastructure resources. Further, the
andestablishedaratethreshold(Rth).Nevertheless,wedonot proposed fingerprintingapproach allows the elaborationof the
enforceonehere,toenablethealgorithmtoinferverylowrate, actualscopeandcharacteristicsoftheinferredcampaignsinan
possible stealthy activities. Indeed, coupled with the analysis effort to provide accurate measurements as well as aid in CPS
of the packet features, the approach embedded in Algorithm situational awareness, analysis and attribution. In this context,
2 would fingerprint Internet-scale CPS probing traces. From a previous works [77] suggested that coordinated unsolicited
7sources within a campaign probe their targets in a similar that this seems to correctly group the majority of connections
fashion. Indeed, the proposed approach exploits this idea by between any given pair of hosts. To validate the outcome
automatically building notions of similar probing behavioral of the proposed model, we compare it against the baseline;
characteristics. To achieve this challenging task, given that we classifying misconfiguration traffic as any darknet traffic that
are exclusively dealing with darknet data [46], the proposed isnotscanningorbackscattered[83].Thelatterisacommonly
approach applies a fusion of a time-series technique in con- employed technique, given the lack of other available formal
junction with a network forensic analysis approach between literature approaches.
the previously inferred (independent) CPS probing flows. Figure 1 depicts the outcome of the execution of the proposed
model on the extracted sessions while Table IV summarizes
1)Time-Series Analysis: As a first step, the proposed
the outcome of the baseline. By comparing Table IV and
approach attempts to infer temporal similarities between the
Figure1,wecannoticethattheproposedmodelfingerprinteda
previously inferred CPS probing activities. To this end, we
lower percentage of misconfiguration traffic than the baseline.
leverageatime-seriesapproachrootedinDynamicTimeWarp-
A semi-automated verification (i.e., using scripts and manual
ing (DTW) [78]. Motivated by its successful experimentation
in diverse research areas [78, 79], the DTW technique mea-
sures the resemblance between data sequences independent of
theirrates.Theaimistocopewithpossibletimedeformations
22%
affiliated with time-dependent data [80]. The DTW takes two
vectors defining the time series as input and produces a
distance unit characterizing their temporal similarities.
2)Netflow Analysis: As a second step, the proposed 78%
approach leverages the context triggered piecewise hashing
(CTPH) [81] technique using a customized developed version
of ssdeep3, which exploits netflow characteristics. The CTPH
technique, which is derived from the digital forensics research Misconfiguration Traffic Unsolicited Traffic
field, is advantageous in comparison with typical hashing as
Fig. 1: Proposed Model: Distribution of darknet sessions
it can provide a percentage of similarity between two traffic
samples rather than producing a null value if the samples are
slightly different. CTPH generates a percentage of similarity
investigation) validated that all the sessions that the model
defining netflow similarities between any two given CPS
inferred as misconfiguration traffic are true misconfiguration
probing sessions.
packets, where almost 50% of them are malformed packets
To this end, to infer orchestrated CPS probing campaigns, while the rest are packets that targeted the darknet IP space
the proposed approach selects and clusters those CPS probing only once. We further investigated the 4.7% darknet sessions
sessions that minimize the DTW similarity metric while max- that the baseline experiment has inferred as misconfiguration
imizing the CTPH measure targeting the same CPS protocol. trafficandnoticedthattheyareindeedfalsepositivesrelatedto
UDPamplificationprobes[66].Thus,wecansafelyclaimthat
IV. RESULTS
ScanningTraffic BackscatterTraffic Misconfiguration
The generated results are based upon scrutinizing 50 GB
65.1% 8.2% 26.7%
of darknet data that were collected from a newly deployed
networktelescopeIPspaceduringaonemonthperiodbetween
TABLE IV: Baseline: Distribution of darknet sessions
April and May, 2016. Please note that while we do not
claim that the design, deployment and management of such
darknet is part of this paper’s contributions, nevertheless, we
the proposed model was accurate in distinguishing between
have to pinpoint that this is a first of a kind cyber threat
darknet misconfiguration traffic and other malicious (or unso-
intelligence gathering project in our region. We organize this
licited) darknet traffic, compared to the baseline. In terms of
section following closely the previously proposed models and
processingperformance,weweresolelyinterestedininferring
approaches.
the execution time of the prototype; the time from which a
darknet dataset is fed into the prototype, until the time the
A. Darknet Preprocessing Model
prototypeflagsthemisconfiguration,filters-outsuchtrafficand
We implemented a prototype of the proposed model of generates a new “clean” dataset. We executed the experiment
Section III-A in Java using the jNetPcap4 library. To exe- on a single commodity machine running Ubuntu 16.04 LTS
cute the proposed model on the darknet dataset, we aggregate with an Intel Core-i7, 64-bit processor and 16 GB of RAM.
the connections into sessions using an approach similar to Theoutputdisclosedthatinordertoachievetheintendedtasks,
the first step algorithm by Kannan et al. [82]. We consider the prototype approximately required, on average, 14 minutes
all those connections within T of each other as part to completely process 1 hour of darknet data. For our current
aggreg
of the same session for a given pair of hosts. We used the tasksinhandthatdonotrequireverylargemeasurementstud-
same proposed threshold, T = 100 seconds, and found ies and given the accuracy and automation that is offered by
aggreg
the proposed model, we believe that such result is acceptable.
3ssdeep:http://ssdeep.sourceforge.net/ Future work will address the performance of the proposed
4jNetPcap:http://jnetpcap.com/?q=jnetpcap-1.4 model by (1) dropping the Java implementation in favor
8of a C implementation that leverages the libpcap5 library, BACnet(onport47808)andEthernet(onports22222/44818).
and (2) employing multi-threading and parallel programming In contrast, Modbus, ICCP, Niagara Fox and DNP3 were
paradigms. among the top abused TCP CPS services. We geo-located
the probing sources of the most prominent probed services
as depicted in Figure 4. The outcome demonstrates that the
B. CPS Probing Inference & Characterization
United States leads in terms of generating most of the probes.
After preprocessing the darknet dataset, we aimed at in- Additionally, we infer distributed horizontal probing events
ferring and characterizing probing events targeting 120 CPS towards Germany, China, and France, and horizontal probing
communicationandcontrolprotocolscovering26CPSservices activities from Japan, Russia, Canada and Korea that respec-
(please recall Table III). Table V provides an overview of the tivelytargettheICCP,FoundationFieldbus,ROCandModbus
CPSscanningactivitiesasinferredbytheproposedalgorithm. CPS protocols. Moreover, we infer other horizontal probing
Intotal,wehaveidentified33897CPSprobingeventstargeting activities from Spain and Singapore, which simultaneously
20 CPS protocols. Figure 2 illustrates the distribution of such target the ICCP and Modbus services.
events during the analyzed period. In an effort to validate
the occurrence of the inferred CPS probing activities, we 1200
ProFinet BACnet DNP
performed the following tasks. First, we relied on third-party
Ethernet Foundation ICCP
publicly available threat repositories provided by Cymon6 1000 Modbus OPC ROC
and AbuseIPDB7. These repositories index Internet-scale sus-
p bi ac ci ko bu os neIP nea td wd or re kss oes pea ras tor re sp .o Trt he ed yb ay lsose idrv ei nc te ifypr to hv eid pe rr os baa bn ld
e
stekcaP
e
68 00 00
b
attack category. We cross-matched the inferred CPS probing o rP
events with those repositories. 400
200
April April May May
Week3 Week4 Week1 Week2
0
Total US DE CN JP CH NL RU ES SG FR IS HK PL CA KR
Scanners 7954 8871 8731 8341 Country
Total
Fig. 4: CPS service scans: Top source countries
Unique 3007 3727 3950 3731
Scanners
TABLE V: Inferred CPS probing events We proceed by analyzing two packet features, namely, IP
Identification (ip-id) and source port (src-port), related to the
inferred CPS probing events. Both features are typically used
Our findings revealed that approximately 4.37% of scan- to make inferences related to the service generating the traffic
ners were indeed involved in various malicious reported ac- [54]. On one hand, Table VI lists the top five ip-id values
tivities (i.e., hacking (41.25%), portscan (31.46%), FTP/SSH and their counts. The results revealed that the majority of the
brute force (13.28%), and DDoS (6.29%)). In an auxiliary used ip-id values are consistent with probes generated from
attempt to validate the occurrence of the remaining scanners, the Zmap probing tool, which has a default ip-id equal to
we relied on DShield8 data. By performing this, we were able 54321(0xd431inhex)[54].Assuch,wecanstatethataround
to validate 88.1% of the remaining scanners, which generated 90% of the inferred CPS probing traffic are indeed generated
1710065 malicious activities and were involved in 151799 from Zmap. On the other hand, Table VII summarizes the top
unique attacks, as reported by DShield. The residual 7.53% employed source ports. We inferred a significant amount of
of scanning sources have never been reported in any publicly probes originating from typically abused ports such as 6000
available dataset that we could find. However, our manual (i.e.,oftenreportedtobeusedbytrojans).Wehavealsonoticed
inspectionindicatedthat80%ofthembelongtoanunsolicited that the majority of the traffic have been received via specific
CPSprobingcampaign(campaignBtobediscussedinSection ports within the 40k and 60k range. While analyzing Modbus
IV-C). Thus, in total, through our validation approach and communication, we have noted that around 30% of its traffic
manual inspection, we were able to validate the occurrence originated from source port 6706, which is the only port that
of all the inferred CPS probing sources, except 1.34%, which consistently appeared during the entire analyzed period. We
close to half of them were confirmed, by investigating their currently have no tangible explanation of such traffic, but we
correspondingpackets,toberelatedtomisconfigurationtraffic will be investigating their packets’ details in the near future.
thatwerenotfilteredoutcorrectlybythepreprocessingmodel.
April April May May
Ourinvestigationrevealedthat98%oftheeventsareTCP-
Week3 Week4 Week1 Week2
based, where they are rendered by vertical probing activities,
0xd431(13060) 0xd431(12632) 0xd431(11640) 0xd431(12849)
inanefforttoverifyallrunningCPSservicesonasinglehost. 0x0100(820) 0x0100(343) 0x0100(566) 0x0100(530)
CPS probing events that exploit the UDP were scarce (close 0x0049(11) 0x0b1c(10) 0x843d(9) 0x0438(13)
0x9625(9) 0x052a(10) 0x591e(9) 0xb530(9)
to 2%) in our analyzed dataset and predominantly targeted 0x0ae7(9) 0x058d(9) 0x01da(9) 0x8faf(9)
5tcpdump:http://www.tcpdump.org/ TABLE VI: Topfiveip-id values(Probepacketcount)
6CymonOpenThreatIntelligence:https://cymon.io/
7AbuseIPDB:https://www.abuseipdb.com/
8DShield:https://www.dshield.org/ Consistent with Section III-B, we now investigate whether
9Modbus (502)
ICCP (102)
Niagara_Fox (1911/4911)
Ethernet (2222/44818)
BACnet (47808)
DNP/DNP3 (19999/20000)
Foundation_Fieldbus_HSE (Multiple)
)tro
ROC_Plus (4000)
p
(
e
Red_Lion (789)
c iv Telvent_OASyS_DNA (Multiple)
re IEC-104 (2404)
S
S SNC_GENe (Multiple)
P
C Iconic_Genesis32_GenBroker (18000)
OPC_UA_Discovery_Server (4840)
SCADA_Node_Ports (4592/14592)
OSIsoft_PI_Server (5450)
Foxboro_DCS_FoxAPI (55555)
ABB_Ranger_2003 (Multiple)
Siemens_Spectrum_Power_TG (Multiple)
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
Probe Packet Count
April-W3 April-W4 May-W1 May-W2
Fig. 2: TCP and UDP probed CPS services
BACnet-udp-47808 DNP3-tcp-20000 Ethernet(multiple) Foundation(mutliple)
ICCP-tcp-102 Modbus-tcp-502 PROFINET-tcp-34962 ROC_Plus-tcp-4000
BACNET-UDP-47808 57 49 69 75 63
ROC_PLUS-TCP-4000 82 30 61 58 30 66
PROFINET-TCP-34962
)T
R
O P MODBUS-TCP-502 69 86 30 63
S(
E C ICCP-TCP-102 49 82 27 30 86
IV
R
E FOUNDATION(MULTIPLE)
S
S
P
C ETHERNET(MUTIPLE) 36 27 82 61 58 66
DNP3-TCP-20000 57 36 82 75
April-Week3 April-Week4 May-Week1 May-Week2
Fig. 3: The co-occurrence patterns of the inferred CPS probing events
CORRELATIONSPER /24 NETWORK ADDRESS BLOCKS (IP)
April April May May by abusing TCP port 4000 and those targeting the Ethernet
Week3 Week4 Week1 Week2
UDP ports 22222 and 44818. In this pattern, 55 to 82 IP
6000(609) 53(535) 1048(785) 6000(426)
addresses were always persistent probing those CPS services.
53933(348) 43490(356) 42880(576) 60000(330)
53(315) 6000(235) 53(334) 53(314) Another interesting finding is related to the ICCP service on
43490(267) 22(214) 59651(223) 63030(156) TCPport102,inwhichitwasfoundtobeprobedwith5other
59531(244) 1048(146) 58017(221) 50449(128)
services,namely,BACnet,DNP3,Ethernet,ROCandModbus.
TABLE VII: Topfiveused/abusedsrc-port(Probepacketcount) In these probes, 27 and 86 IP addresses concurrently shared
the probing task. Additionally, we have pinpointed probing
sources that exclusively targeted the Foundation Fieldbus and
PROFINETservices,wheretheirprobingsourcesdidnotprobe
any others CPS protocols. We also note that the probing
the same CPS scanning sources are prevalent on different
sources targeting the Modbus protocol, also targeted 6 other
timeperiodsbyderivingtheirco-occurrencepatterns.Figure3
(CPS and non-CPS) protocols 74% of the time. By focusing
showstheextractedpatternsforthemostprobedCPSservices,
on the Modbus protocol, which was the most probed in our
which are visualized in associated and correlated colors. Our
analyzed dataset, we can infer from Figure 5 that 12 Modbus
analysis revealed one clear consistent pattern that remained
scanners remained active during the entire analyzed period.
active during the entire analyzed period. Such pattern is an
Although we note such continuous and consistent activities
association between sources probing the ROC PLUS protocol
10Similarities April W3 April W4 May W1 May W2
April W3 49 29 14 29
among MAporild Wb4us sc29anne1r51s, the30 maj3o0rity originated from rel- verificationoftheirIPrangesandhostnamesrevealedthatthey
May W1 14 30 35 15
atively neMway W2sourc2e9s, w3i0th an15 ave24r6age of 121 new probing areknowntoperformprobingactivitiesforcybersecurityand
sources per week. 481 research purposes. Table VIII provides an overview of these
unsolicited campaigns.
April May
Week4 Week1
Number
Source
151 35 Reference domain ofdistinct
29 IPaddresses
WA ep er kil 3 29 12 14 15 WM eeay k2 A B * *. .e iodu 16 34 6
49 12 111 246 C *.com 188
14 *.de
13 28
D *.cn 116
29 E *.ru 54
Fig. 5: Co-occurrences within Modbus sources TABLE VIII: Inferred CPS probing campaigns
We have encountered a unique probing behavior while
C. CPS Probing Orchestration Fingerprinting
investigatingprobingcampaignAofTableVIII.Thecampaign
Indeed, the previously inferred CPS probing events ap- has indeed conducted 6 operations during the analyzed one-
pear to originate from independent probing sources. However, month period. In fact, we have identified this orchestrated
consistent with Section III-C, we now execute the proposed campaignoperatinginaproductof16uniquehosts,leveraging
approachtoexaminetheexistenceoforchestratedCPSprobing 64 (16 × 4) distinct IP addresses, running in parallel, from
events. The proposed approach identified 9085 probing events randomports,andsearchingforaspecificlistofCPSprotocols
generated from 58 campaigns. Figure 6 provides a holistic in the following sequence: Modbus on TCP port 502, Niagara
depictionoftheinferredcampaigns,wherethenodesrepresent Fox on TCP port 1911 and BACnet on TCP port 47808.
unique source IP addresses and the edges represent the exis- On average, for each protocol, 14 requests were sent to
tence of a concrete derived similarity based on the analyzed different dark IP addresses. It is apparent that this campaign
generatedprobingtrafficpertheproposedapproachofSection is specifically searching for online CPS.
III-C;onecannoticetheappearanceofseverallarge-scaleCPS
Concerning campaign B of Table VIII, its probing strategy
probing campaigns. In the sequel, we only elaborate on 5 of
is quite different from that of the first campaign. Instead of
those campaigns that were shown to be of large-scale (i.e.,
mainly targeting CPS services, this campaign probed a variety
have at least 50 sources). It is noteworthy to mention that
ofservices.Infact,theaveragenumberofservicesprobedper
around60%oftheinferredcampaigns(includingthose5large-
unique host is 191, some of which are Modbus and BACnet.
scalecampaigns)possessedaverylowportsweepprobingrate,
Furthermore, the campaign “recycled” 13 new hosts every
rendering them independent and/or undetectable by typical
week and their probes originated from random source ports.
intrusion detection systems or firewall rules. In contrast, our
Moreover, in contrast to the first campaign, which mainly
proposed methods in terms of inference algorithm and orches-
utilized TCP to probe, this second campaign leveraged more
tration fingerprinting, can evidently assess those seemingly-
servicessuchasUDP,NBNS,CoAP,MDNS,ISAKMP,ENIP,
independent probes to infer their underlying coordination.
and QUIC. The collected information from such probes could
be used by malicious entities to perform vulnerability analysis
on a larger number of publicly reachable CPS services.
Incontrasttotheaforementionedtwocampaignsthatwere
generated from unsolicited yet known sources, we now detail
three inferred orchestrated campaigns that we deem as being
malicious,giventhattheirdomainspointedtosuspicioushosts
and/or their IP addresses did not reflect any known/benign
entities.
One of the largest inferred campaigns (campaign C of
Table VIII) that meet such criteria originated from numerous
locations in the United States and Germany. The campaign
consisted of 188 distinct hosts conducting large-scale scan-
ning in a stealthy manner. Generally, this campaign targeted
each destination IP address for a maximum of 5 times. The
campaign targeted Modbus 30% of the time, in addition to
Fig.6:AholisticillustrationoftheinferredorchestratedCPSprobing
events several other services such as CWMP, HTTP and HTTP-
ALT, and HTTPS. In fact, the campaign initiated its scans
againstModbus,followedbyaUDPandanHTTPscan.While
The first two probing campaigns were found to be gen- probing Modbus, this campaign leveraged only two source
erated by an organization and an academic institution. A ports, 40849 and 63419, among all 188 hosts. This may serve
11toindicatethatsuchcampaignismostlikelyrunningthesame the CPS protocols. Consequently, our approach cannot draw
probing tools/techniques/malware. Due to the non-interactive a holistic view of the complete CPS abuse beyond such
nature of darknet traffic analysis, it is rather difficult to clarify communication attempts. This is a typical limitation though
the aim of this campaign’s activities. However, our claim is of analyzing network telescope one-way traffic.
that, given that the abused services which are tagged along
Defense against scanning: Evidently, by using our de-
withModbus,include,CWMP,SSHandHTTP,thiscampaign
ployed network telescope, a significant number of CPS scan-
can be dedicated to execute CPS brute force attacks. In fact,
ning activities reached our networks, probing for Internet
by cross-matching the campaign’s IP addresses against the
services including a variety of CPS-specific services. The
previously noted publicly available threat repositories, 68.7%
nature and intent of these events are at best hard to be
of them were found to have been previously reported for SSH
concretelyverified.Therefore,itisimportanttohavedefensive
and HTTP brute force attacks.
mechanisms in place to protect networks and CPS realms
Anotheruniquecampaign(campaignDofTableVIII)orig- against potentially malicious subsequent activities. The first
inated from various cities in China. This campaign leveraged step in defending against such malicious traffic consists of
116 IP addresses, during two non-consecutive weeks in the detecting the scanning activities. For instance, after a CPS
analyzed one-month period. The campaign targeted Modbus scanning campaign has been identified, CPS operators can
and BACnet, yet also focused on ports 80 and 443. After proceedwithdeployingsolutionstoprotectagainstit.Oneso-
manual inspection, we noticed that many-to-one brute force lution in the case of known/unsolicited campaigns is to report
HTTP and HTTPS requests are being extensively generated thescansandrequestexclusionofaparticularnetworkaddress
throughdifferentsourceports.Wepostulatethatthiscampaign spacefromsubsequentscans.Legitimatecampaignsoftenhave
is targeting the Human Machine Interface (HMI) of CPS. mechanisms in place for excluding networks from their scans.
In the event that exclusion requests are not possible, or are
Last but not least, we also identified a relatively short
not respected by the scanning entities (i.e., in the case of
coordinated scan, campaign E of Table VIII, that remained
malicious CPS scanning activities), incoming network traffic
active for a one week period. Attributed to Russia, this cam-
from source IP addresses that are repeatedly involved in such
paign is dedicated towards probing the Foundation Fieldbus
scanning activities can be dropped with the use of blacklists.
HSE. While the campaign only leveraged 54 IP addresses,
Such lists can be intuitively built based on darknet analysis.
however, it has contacted almost all (98%) of our darkspace
Ideally, deploying darknets at different locations can provide
by generating traffic from random source ports within the
more global and accurate blacklisting information.
30k and 50k range. Such probes could identify vulnerabilities
withinthisprotocol’simplementation,suchastheIPmulticast Indeed, the most difficult step in defending against scans
features on Foundation Fieldbus systems, which are typically and their subsequent activities is detecting the scanning activ-
not well protected. ities, since deploying solutions such as reports and blacklists
are relatively straightforward. Unfortunately, as [54] uncovers,
V. DISCUSSION the vast majority of networks do not proactively detect scans,
but rather accidentally discover them during maintenance or
Our overall proposed models, approaches and techniques
troubleshooting. Scanning activities leave footprints in IDSs,
leverage network telescopes to infer CPS probing activities.
firewalllogs,webserverlogsetc.,thatcanaidindetectingthem
Thus, we now present some of the assumptions that underlie
and extracting scanners’ source IP addresses for consequent
our analysis, in addition to some challenges and ways to
blacklisting.However,goingthroughthelogscanbeatedious
leverage the obtained results to enhance CPS security.
and error-prone process that can resolve in a large number of
Attackers’IPAddressSelection:Ournewlydeployeddark- false positive and false negative results, which can have an
net IP address space is still at its infancy. Thus, the proposed unwanted effect on the network’s operation. To this end, we
approach is unable to monitor and infer events that do not recommend the use of a network telescope within or external
target our sensors. This can occur when attackers use an toCPSenvironments,similartotheonedeployedandreported
alreadypublishedhitlistortestspecificandknownvulnerable in this paper. Incoming traffic to the network telescope’s
services. Although such methods will allow scans to avoid dedicatedIPaddressescanbeautomaticallyanalyzedtodetect
being detected or assessed by our approaches, adversaries in scanning activities and pinpoint the scanners’ source IP ad-
general prefer to employ up-to-date and various hit lists of dresses.Apositivesideeffectofthisapproachisthattheanal-
services to decrease their chances of being detected and to ysis of the darknet traffic can reveal other useful patterns for
increase their chances of launching subsequent attacks. To CPS administrators, such as misconfiguration errors, infected
achieve this, at least one global scan is needed to first assess CPSdevices,ongoingmaliciouscampaigns,etc.ForlargeCPS
the impact of the attack; a scan that would probably hit our networks, interactive CPS honeypots can be complementary
sensors.Tothisend,weobviouslydonotclaimthatwedidnot deployed,whichcanfurtherassistinidentifyingtheintentand
miss any other Internet-scale CPS probing activity, however, nature of the incoming traffic.
our collaborators and us, are not aware of any worldwide
Research Trends: Recent network telescope analysis fo-
reported CPS probes that were not (at least partially) inferred
cused mostly on large-scale Internet scanning activities with
by our proposed methods during the analyzed period.
thegoalofdetectingscannersandidentifyingbroadpatternsin
Incomplete view of the CPS abuse: As briefed in Section theirscanningbehavior[54].Thisaspectinnetworktelescopes
II,ourapproachfallsunderpassivenetworktrafficmonitoring. research can be attributed to the emergence of highly efficient
As such, since we do not interact with incoming traffic, we scanning tools and techniques, which can scan the entire IPv4
can only observe the first communication packets related to address space in just a few minutes. We strongly believe
12that network telescope research will shift towards specialized [3] Ivan Stojmenovic. Machine-to-machine communications
per-protocol analysis, relatively similar to the one presented with in-network data aggregation, processing, and actu-
here, in an effort to generate fine-grain cyber-intelligence. ation for large-scale cyber-physical systems. Internet of
Such a shift would be in line with the evolution of the threat Things Journal, IEEE, 1(2):122–128, 2014.
landscape; current threat actors, particularly Advanced Persis- [4] Y. Zhang, M. Qiu, C. W. Tsai, M. M. Hassan, and
tent Threats (APTs), have become increasingly sophisticated A.Alamri. Health-cps:Healthcarecyber-physicalsystem
targeting evolving paradigms (IoT, CPS, etc.) As such, we assisted by cloud and big data. IEEE Systems Journal,
undoubtedly believe that future attacks will include APTs PP(99):1–8, 2015.
dedicatedtowardstheseparadigms.Inthiscontext,itwouldbe [5] Insup Lee, Oleg Sokolsky, Sanjian Chen, John Hatcliff,
interesting to observe how the Internet measurement, control Eunkyoung Jee, BaekGyu Kim, Andrew King, Margaret
and cyber security research communities would collaborate to Mullen-Fortino, Soojin Park, Alexander Roederer, et al.
leverage their capabilities to contribute to the security of such Challenges and research directions in medical cyber–
complex systems. physical systems. Proceedings of the IEEE, 100(1):75–
90, 2012.
VI. CONCLUDINGREMARKS [6] HamzaFawzi,PauloTabuada,andSuhasDiggavi.Secure
estimation and control for cyber-physical systems under
In a dedicated effort to capture real unsolicited and ma-
adversarial attacks. IEEE Transactions on Automatic
licious notions in the realms of CPS, this paper presented
Control, 59(6):1454–1467, 2014.
a thorough investigation of CPS probing activities towards
[7] CyberattacksmountingfastinU.S. http://www.cbsnews.
ampleofCPSprotocols.Thelatterwasachievedbyexamining,
com/news/cyber-attacks-mounting-fast-in-us/.
analyzing and correlating various dimensions of significant
[8] Frank Kargl, Rens W van der Heijden, Hartmut Konig,
amount of darknet data. A novel probabilistic model was
Alfonso Valdes, and Marc C Dacier. Insights on the
presented and employed to sanitize darknet data from miscon-
security and dependability of industrial control systems.
figuration traffic. Subsequently, inference and characterization
IEEE Security & Privacy, 12(6):75–78, 2014.
modules were devised to extract and analyze diverse CPS
[9] ICS-CERT: Cyber-Attack Against Ukrainian Criti-
probing events. To this end, trends, packets’ headers and
cal Infrastructure. https://ics-cert.us-cert.gov/alerts/
co-occurrence patterns of such events, among others, were
IR-ALERT-H-16-056-01.
reported. Additionally, in an effort to tackle the challenging
[10] The Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Re-
problem of inferring CPS orchestrated probing campaigns by
sponse Team (ICS-CERT). https://ics-cert.us-cert.gov.
exclusively monitoring and analyzing a network telescope IP
[11] DinaHadzˇiosmanovic´,RobinSommer,EmmanueleZam-
space, we presented a hybrid approach based on time series
bon, and Pieter H Hartel. Through the eye of the plc:
and netflow analysis methods. The outcome disclosed more
semantic security monitoring for industrial processes.
than 9 thousand orchestrated, stealthy CPS events, originating
In Proceedings of the 30th Annual Computer Security
fromaplethoraofunsolicitedandmaliciouscampaigns.While
Applications Conference, pages 126–135. ACM, 2014.
Section II highlighted a number of research gaps that are
[12] M. Caselli, E. Zambon, and F. Kargl. Sequence-aware
undoubtedlyworthyofbeinginvestigated,wearecurrentlyde-
intrusion detection in industrial control systems. In
signinganddeployingdiverseCPShoneypotstoinfertangible
Proceedingsofthe1stACMWorkshoponCyber-Physical
CPS attack models. In this context, we will be leveraging the
System Security, pages 13–24. ACM, 2015.
informationobtainedfromthisworkcoupledwiththoseattack
[13] Sean Peisert, Jonathan Margulies, David M Nicol, Hi-
models to build tailored CPS resiliency mechanisms, from the
manshuKhurana,andChrisSawall. Designed-insecurity
cyber as well as the control/physical perspective, to address
for cyber-physical systems. IEEE Security & Privacy,
the security of CPS in the power and critical manufacturing
12(5):9–12, 2014.
sectors.
[14] Stephen McLaughlin and Patrick McDaniel. Sabot:
specification-basedpayloadgenerationforprogrammable
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS logic controllers. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM
conference on Computer and communications security,
TheauthorswouldliketosincerelythankalltheITperson-
pages 439–449. ACM, 2012.
nel at New York University in Abu Dhabi and New York for
[15] HoneyNet Project. CONPOT ICS/SCADA Honeypot.
their support and aid in deploying and managing the darknet
[Online]: http://conpot.org/.
monitors. The authors are also grateful to the anonymous
[16] Michael Bailey, Evan Cooke, Farnam Jahanian, Andrew
reviewers for their insightful comments and suggestions.
Myrick, and Sushant Sinha. Practical darknet mea-
surement. In 40th Annual Conference on Information
REFERENCES
Sciences and Systems, pages 1496–1501. IEEE, 2006.
[1] Kyoung-Dae Kim and Panganamala R Kumar. Cyber– [17] Yao Liu, Peng Ning, and Michael K Reiter. False data
physical systems: A perspective at the centennial. injectionattacksagainststateestimationinelectricpower
Proceedings of the IEEE, 100(Special Centennial grids. ACM Transactions on Information and System
Issue):1287–1308, 2012. Security (TISSEC), 14(1):13, 2011.
[2] Eric Simmon, Kyoung-Sook Kim, Eswaran Subrahma- [18] Henrik Sandberg, Andre´ Teixeira, and Karl H Johans-
nian, Ryong Lee, Frederic De Vaulx, Yohei Murakami, son. On security indices for state estimators in power
Koji Zettsu, and Ram D Sriram. A vision of cyber- networks. In First Workshop on Secure Control Systems
physical cloud computing for smart networked systems. (SCS), Stockholm, 2010, 2010.
NIST, Aug, 2013. [19] Fabio Pasqualetti, Florian Dorfler, and Francesco Bullo.
13Attack detection and identification in cyber-physical Lindqvist, Keith Skinner, and Alfonso Valdes. Using
systems. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, model-basedintrusiondetectionforSCADAnetworks. In
58(11):2715–2729, 2013. ProceedingsoftheSCADAsecurityscientificsymposium,
[20] Yilin Mo, Rohan Chabukswar, and Bruno Sinopoli. De- volume 46, pages 1–12. Citeseer, 2007.
tectingintegrityattacksonscadasystems. IEEETransac- [36] NivGoldenbergandAvishaiWool. Accuratemodelingof
tions on Control Systems Technology, 22(4):1396–1407, modbus/tcp for intrusion detection in scada systems. In-
2014. ternational Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection,
[21] MiroslavPajic,ShreyasSundaram,GeorgeJPappas,and 6(2):63–75, 2013.
RahulMangharam. Thewirelesscontrolnetwork:Anew [37] SibinMohan,StanleyBak,EmilianoBetti,HeechulYun,
approach for control over networks. IEEE Transactions Lui Sha, and Marco Caccamo. S3a: secure system sim-
on Automatic Control, 56(10):2305–2318, 2011. plex architecture for enhanced security of cyber-physical
[22] Shreyas Sundaram and Christoforos N Hadjicostis. Dis- systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1202.5722, 2012.
tributed function calculation via linear iterative strategies [38] Helge Janicke, Andrew Nicholson, Stuart Webber, and
in the presence of malicious agents. IEEE Transactions Antonio Cau. Runtime-monitoring for industrial control
on Automatic Control, 56(7):1495–1508, 2011. systems. Electronics, 4(4):995–1017, 2015.
[23] Yilin Mo et al. False data injection attacks against state [39] Saman Zonouz, Julian Rrushi, and Steve McLaughlin.
estimation in wireless sensor networks. In 49th IEEE Detecting industrial control malware using automated
ConferenceonDecisionandControl(CDC),pages5967– PLCcodeanalytics. Security&Privacy,IEEE,12(6):40–
5972. IEEE, 2010. 47, 2014.
[24] A. Teixeira, I. Shames, H. Sandberg, and K.H. Johans- [40] Jan-OleMalchow,DanielMarzin,JohannesKlick,Robert
son. A secure control framework for resource-limited Kovacs, and Volker Roth. Plc guard: A practical defense
adversaries. Automatica, 51:135 – 148, 2015. against attacks on cyber-physical systems. In IEEE
[25] Y. Mo, S. Weerakkody, and B. Sinopoli. Physical au- Conference on Communications and Network Security
thentication of control systems: Designing watermarked (CNS), pages 326–334. IEEE, 2015.
control inputs to detect counterfeit sensor outputs. Con- [41] Marco Caselli, Emmanuele Zambon, Jonathan Petit, and
trol Systems, IEEE, 35(1):93–109, Feb 2015. Frank Kargl. Modeling message sequences for intrusion
[26] Sean Weerakkody and Bruno Sinopoli. Detecting in- detectioninindustrialcontrolsystems. InCriticalInfras-
tegrity attacks on control systems using a moving target tructure Protection IX, pages 49–71. Springer, 2015.
approach. In 54th IEEE Conference on Decision and [42] Stephen E McLaughlin. On dynamic malware payloads
Control (CDC), pages 5820–5826. IEEE, 2015. aimed at programmable logic controllers. In HotSec,
[27] Man-Ki Yoon and Gabriela F Ciocarlie. Communication 2011.
pattern monitoring: Improving the utility of anomaly de- [43] Patrick Du¨ssel, Christian Gehl, Pavel Laskov, Jens-Uwe
tectionforindustrialcontrolsystems. InNDSSWorkshop Bußer,ChristofSto¨rmann,andJanKa¨stner.Cyber-critical
onSecurityofEmergingNetworkingTechnologies,2014. infrastructure protection using real-time payload-based
[28] StephenEMcLaughlin,SamanAZonouz,DevinJPohly, anomaly detection. In Critical Information Infrastruc-
and Patrick Drew McDaniel. A trusted safety verifier for tures Security, pages 85–97. Springer, 2009.
process controller code. In NDSS, 2014. [44] Wei Gao et al. On scada control system command and
[29] Abdulmohsen Almalawi, Xinghuo Yu, Zahir Tari, Adil response injection and intrusion detection. In eCrime
Fahad, and Ibrahim Khalil. An unsupervised anomaly- Researchers Summit (eCrime), 2010, pages 1–9. IEEE,
based detection approach for integrity attacks on scada 2010.
systems. Computers & Security, 46:94–110, 2014. [45] Andreas Paul, Franka Schuster, and Hartmut Ko¨nig.
[30] Martin Roesch. Lightweight intrusion detection for net- Towards the protection of industrial control systems–
works. InProceedingsofthe13thConferenceonSystems conclusions of a vulnerability analysis of profinet io. In
Administration (LISA 99), pages 229–238, 2005. Detection of Intrusions and Malware, and Vulnerability
[31] Quickdraw SCADA IDS. http://www.digitalbond.com/ Assessment, pages 160–176. Springer, 2013.
tools/quickdraw/. [46] Zhichun Li, A. Goyal, Yan Chen, and V. Paxson. To-
[32] Carlo Bellettini and Julian L Rrushi. Vulnerability wardssituationalawarenessoflarge-scalebotnetprobing
analysis of scada protocol binaries through detection of events. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
memory access taintedness. In Information Assurance Security,, 6(1):175–188, 2011.
and Security Workshop (IAW’07) SMC, pages 341–348. [47] YuJin,GyorgySimon,KuaiXu,Zhi-LiZhang,andVipin
IEEE, 2007. Kumar. Gray’s anatomy: Dissecting scanning activities
[33] Eric J Byres, Dan Hoffman, and Nate Kube. On shaky using IP gray space analysis. Usenix SysML07, 2007.
ground–a study of security vulnerabilities in control pro- [48] Yu Jin, Zhi-Li Zhang, Kuai Xu, Feng Cao, and Sam-
tocols. Proc. 5th American Nuclear Society Int. Mtg. bit Sahu. Identifying and tracking suspicious activities
on Nuclear Plant Instrumentation, Controls, and HMI throughIPgrayspaceanalysis. InProceedingsofthe3rd
Technology, 2006. annualACMworkshoponMiningnetworkdata,MineNet
[34] Albert Treytl, Thilo Sauter, and Christian Schwaiger. ’07, pages 7–12, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.
Security measures for industrial fieldbus systems-state [49] Zhichun Li, Anup Goyal, Yan Chen, and Vern Paxson.
of the art and solutions for ip-based approaches. In Automatinganalysisoflarge-scalebotnetprobingevents.
IEEEInternationalWorkshoponFactoryCommunication In Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on
Systems, pages 201–209. IEEE, 2004. Information, Computer, and Communications Security,
[35] Steven Cheung, Bruno Dutertre, Martin Fong, Ulf ASIACCS’09,pages11–22,NewYork,NY,USA,2009.
14ACM. protocols for ddos abuse. In Symposium on Network and
[50] Darcy Benoit and Andre´ Trudel. World’s first web cen- Distributed System Security (NDSS), 2014.
sus. International Journal of Web Information Systems, [67] Charlie Scott and Richard Carbone. Designing and
3(4):378, 2007. implementingahoneypotforascadanetwork. TheSANS
[51] JohnHeidemann,YuriPradkin,RameshGovindan,Chris- Institute Reading Room., 22:2016, 2014.
tos Papadopoulos, Genevieve Bartlett, and Joseph Ban- [68] VenkatPothamsettyandMatthewFranz. Scadahoneynet
nister. Census and survey of the visible internet. In project:Buildinghoneypotsforindustrialnetworks,2008.
Proceedings of the 8th ACM SIGCOMM conference on [69] Digital Bond. SCADA Honeynet. [Online]: http://www.
Internet measurement, IMC ’08, pages 169–182, New digitalbond.com/tools/scada-honeynet/.
York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM. [70] Neal Krawetz. Anti-honeypot technology. IEEE Security
[52] Y Pryadkin, R Lindell, J Bannister, and R Govindan. & Privacy, 2(1):76–79, 2004.
An empirical evaluation of IP address space occupancy. [71] EleazarAguirre-Anaya,GinaGallegos-Garcia,NicolasS.
USC/ISI Technical Report ISI-TR, 598, 2004. Luna, and Luis A. V. Vargas. A new procedure to
[53] Ang Cui and Salvatore J. Stolfo. A quantitative anal- detect low interaction honeypots. International Journal
ysis of the insecurity of embedded network devices: of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 4(6):848–857,
results of a wide-area scan. In Proceedings of the 12 2014.
26thAnnualComputerSecurityApplicationsConference, [72] Team CYMRU. Who is looking for your SCADA
ACSAC ’10, pages 97–106, New York, NY, USA, 2010. infrastructure? [Online]: https://www.team-cymru.com/
ACM. ReadingRoom/Whitepapers/2009/scada.pdf, 2008.
[54] ZakirDurumeric,MichaelBailey,andJAlexHalderman. [73] MatthewFord,JonathanStevens,andJohnRonan. Initial
An internet-wide view of internet-wide scanning. In results from an ipv6 darknet13. In International Con-
USENIX Security Symposium, 2014. ference on Internet Surveillance and Protection, pages
[55] A.Dainotti,A.King,K.Claffy,F.Papale,andA.Pescap. 13–13. IEEE, 2006.
Analysisofa”/0”StealthScanfromaBotnet.IEEE/ACM [74] Andrew Gelman, John B Carlin, Hal S Stern, and Don-
Transactions on Networking, 2014. ald B Rubin. Bayesian data analysis, volume 2. Taylor
[56] Internet census, 2012. http://internetcensus2012. & Francis, 2014.
bitbucket.org/paper.html. [75] Lukas Kra¨mer, Johannes Krupp, Daisuke Makita, To-
[57] Steve Bellovin. There Be Dragons. In USENIX Summer, momi Nishizoe, Takashi Koide, Katsunari Yoshioka, and
1992. Christian Rossow. Amppot: Monitoring and defending
[58] Steven M Bellovin. Packets found on an internet. ACM againstamplificationddosattacks.InResearchinAttacks,
SIGCOMMComputerCommunicationReview,23(3):26– Intrusions,andDefenses,pages615–636.Springer,2015.
31, 1993. [76] Raimundo Real and Juan M Vargas. The probabilistic
[59] Claude Fachkha and Mourad Debbabi. Darknet as a basisofjaccard’sindexofsimilarity. Systematicbiology,
sourceofcyberintelligence:Survey,taxonomy,andchar- pages 380–385, 1996.
acterization. IEEECommunicationsSurveys&Tutorials, [77] Moheeb Abu Rajab, Jay Zarfoss, Fabian Monrose, and
18(2):1197–1227, 2016. Andreas Terzis. A multifaceted approach to understand-
[60] David Moore, Colleen Shannon, Douglas J Brown, Ge- ing the botnet phenomenon. In Proceedings of the 6th
offrey M Voelker, and Stefan Savage. Inferring Internet ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement,
denial-of-service activity. ACM Transactions on Com- pages 41–52. ACM, 2006.
puter Systems (TOCS), 24(2):115–139, 2006. [78] Hiroaki Sakoe and Seibi Chiba. Dynamic program-
[61] DavidMoore,VernPaxson,StefanSavage,ColleenShan- ming algorithm optimization for spoken word recogni-
non, Stuart Staniford, and Nicholas Weaver. The spread tion. IEEETransactionsonAcoustics,SpeechandSignal
of the sapphire/slammer worm, 2003. Processing, 26(1):43–49, 1978.
[62] Michael Bailey, Evan Cooke, Farnam Jahanian, David [79] Zhenxin Zhan, Maochao Xu, and Shouhuai Xu. A
Watson, and Jose Nazario. The blaster worm: Then and characterization of cybersecurity posture from network
now. IEEE Security and Privacy, 3(4):26–31, July 2005. telescope data. In Proceedings of the 6th international
[63] Kriangkrai Limthong, Fukuda Kensuke, and Pirawat conference on trustworthy systems, Intrust, volume 14,
Watanapongse. Wavelet-based unwanted traffic time 2014.
seriesanalysis. InInternationalConferenceonComputer [80] Meinard Mu¨ller. Dynamic time warping. Information
and Electrical Engineering (ICCEE), pages 445–449. retrieval for music and motion, pages 69–84, 2007.
IEEE, 2008. [81] Jesse Kornblum. Identifying almost identical files using
[64] AlbertoDainotti,RomanAmman,EmileAben,andKim- context triggered piecewise hashing. Digital investiga-
berly C Claffy. Extracting benefit from harm: using tion, 3:91–97, 2006.
malware pollution to analyze the impact of political and [82] Jayanthkumar Kannan, Jaeyeon Jung, Vern Paxson, and
geophysical events on the internet. ACM SIGCOMM Can Emre Koksal. Semi-automated discovery of appli-
Computer Communication Review, 42(1):31–39, 2012. cation session structure. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM
[65] Claude Fachkha, Elias Bou-Harb, and Mourad Debbabi. SIGCOMM IMC, pages 119–132. ACM, 2006.
Fingerprinting internet DNS amplification DDoS activ- [83] David Moore, Colleen Shannon, Douglas J Brown, Ge-
ities. In 2014 6th International Conference on New offrey M Voelker, and Stefan Savage. Inferring internet
Technologies, Mobility and Security (NTMS), pages 1– denial-of-service activity. ACM Transactions on Com-
5. IEEE, 2014. puter Systems (TOCS), 24(2):115–139, 2006.
[66] ChristianRossow. Amplificationhell:Revisitingnetwork
15