The Internet Motion Sensor: A Distributed Blackhole Monitoring System
MichaelBailey,* EvanCooke,* FarnamJahanian,*† JoseNazario,† DavidWatson*
*ElectricalEngineeringandComputerScienceDepartment
UniversityofMichigan
{mibailey,emcooke,farnam,dwatson}@umich.edu
†ArborNetworks
jose@arbor.net
Abstract thetwohavebecomesynonymous. Thisconnection,while
necessary, leaves network assets vulnerable to the rapidly
moving threats of today’s Internet, including fast moving
As national infrastructure becomes intertwined with worms,distributeddenialofserviceattacks,androutingex-
emergingglobaldatanetworks,thestabilityandintegrityof ploits. Thesethreatsshareseveralkeyproperties. Firstand
the two have become synonymous. This connection, while foremostthesethreatsaregloballyscoped,respectingnoge-
necessary, leaves network assets vulnerable to the rapidly ographicortopologicalboundaries. Complicatingmatters,
moving threats of today’s Internet, including fast moving theyaresometimeszero-daythreats,exploitingvulnerabil-
worms, distributed denial of service attacks, and routing ities for which no signature or patch has been developed,
exploits. This paper introduces the Internet Motion Sen- making detection and mitigation of these threats problem-
sor (IMS), a globally scoped Internet monitoring system atic. Third, thesethreatsareevolutionary, witheachworm
whose goal is to measure, characterize, and track threats. orattacklearningfrompreviousfailures,spawninganarms
The IMS architecture is based on three novel components. race between the network defenders and the attackers. Fi-
First,aDistributedMonitoringInfrastructureincreasesvis- nally,manyofthesethreatsareexceptionallyvirulent,prop-
ibility into global threats. Second, a Lightweight Active agatingtotheentirevulnerablepopulationintheInternetin
Responder provides enough interactivity that traffic on the amatterofminutes,renderinghumanresponseimpractical.
same service can be differentiated independent of applica- Researchers are attempting to address these threats by in-
tion semantics. Third, a Payload Signatures and Caching vestigatingnewmethodsformonitoringandanalysis.
mechanismavoidsrecordingduplicatedpayloads,reducing One promising method for investigating these threats is
overheadandassistinginidentifyingnewanduniquepay- the monitoring of unused or dark address space [22, 11].
loads. Weexplorethearchitecturaltradeoffsofthissystem Because there are no legitimate hosts in an unused ad-
in the context of a 3 year deployment across multiple dark dress block, traffic must be the result of misconfiguration,
addressblocksranginginsizefrom/24stoa/8. Thesesen- backscatter from spoofed source addresses, or scanning
sorsrepresentarangeoforganizationsandadiversesam- fromwormsandotherprobing. Thispre-filteringprovides
pleoftheroutableIPv4spaceincludingnineofallroutable an excellent method of studying Internet threats, however
/8 address ranges. Data gathered from these deployments we believe there are two key design challenges that must
isusedtodemonstratetheabilityoftheIMStocaptureand beaddressedwhenconstructingamonitoringinfrastructure
characterizeseveralimportantInternetthreats: theBlaster basedonthistechnique.
worm (August 2003), the Bagle backdoor scanning efforts Thefirstissueissensorcoverage. Sensorcoveragerefers
(March2004),andtheSCODenialofServiceattacks(De- to the visibility of the system into Internet threats. One
cember2003). method to increase visibility is to monitor larger blocks of
address space [13]. The problem is that the IPv4 space is
limited and there are a small number of large unused ad-
1 Introduction dress blocks available for instrumentation. In addition, it
hasbeenshownthataddressblocksindifferentnetworkssee
As national infrastructure becomes intertwined with
differentthreattraffic[7]. Thus,sensorsizeandtopological
emergingglobaldatanetworks,thestabilityandintegrityoflocationareimportantcomponentsofsensorcoverage.
The second issue is service emulation. If the sensors do Internet
not directly involve live hosts then there is a question of /8 Sensor
whatservicestoemulateandatwhatleveltoemulatethem. ...
/24 Sensor Provider
This is a difficult problem given the immense number ser-
Networks
vices on the Internet today. An ideal system would repro-
/16 Sensor
duce all current and future services with exactly the same Corporate
University
behaviorasallpossibleend-hosts. Suchasystemisimpos- Network Network
sible,sotheremustatradeoff. /24 Sensor
/24 Sensor
TheIMSisadistributed,globallyscoped,Internetthreat /24 Sensor
/24 Sensor
monitoringsystemdesignedwiththesechallengesinmind.
The goal of the IMS is to measure, characterize, and track
Figure1.InternetMotionSensorArchitecture
a broad range of Internet threats. This means achieving
themaximumpossiblesensorcoveragewithenoughfidelity
to gather intelligence on specific services. The fundamen-
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 details the
tallydistributednatureofthisarchitectureallowstheIMSto
architectureandcorecomponentsoftheIMS.Section3de-
monitor diverse addresses and topologies. In order get the
scribestheIMSdeploymentandhighlightstheinovativeca-
most information possible given the scale of system, each
paibilitiesofthissystembyexaminingthreedistinctevents.
sensorpassivelycollectsallUDPandICMPtrafficanduses
Section4provideanoverviewofrelatedwork.Finally,Sec-
a lightweight responder to elicit the initial packet of each
tion5discussesfuturedirectionsandconclusions.
TCP connection. This approach effectively emulates the
establishmentofTCPtransactionsprovidingthemaximum
2 InternetMotionSensorArchitecture
service coverage without the need for maintenance-heavy
service emulation. This approach is used in conjunction The Internet Motion Sensor was designed to measure,
withaninnovativepayloadsignatureandcachingtechnique. characterize, and track a broad range of Internet threats.
Observations have shown that many of the packets seen at This particular challenge necessitates a lightweight moni-
the sensors are duplicates, making this caching technique toringapproachhavingglobalvisibility. Morespecifically,
highly effective in managing the overhead of storing pay- theIMSwasdesignedto:
loads.
Themaincontributionsofthispaperare: • Maintain a level of interactivity that can differentiate
trafficonthesameservice.
• The design and implementation of a distributed,
• ProvidevisibilityintoInternetthreatsbeyondaddress,
globallyscoped,Internetthreatmonitoringsystem.
geographical,andoperationalboundaries.
The IMS architecture is based on three novel com-
ponents. First, a Distributed Monitoring Infrastruc-
• Enablecharacterizationofemergingthreatswhilemin-
ture increases visibility into global threats. Second, a
imizingincrementaleffort.
Lightweight Active Responder provides enough inter-
activity that traffic on the same service can be differ- While other systems have combined sensors of different
entiated independent of application semantics. Third, measurementfidelities[32],thegoalofourprojectistogain
a Payload Signatures and Caching mechanism avoids global threat visibility rather than in-depth information on
recordingduplicatedpayloads,reducingoverheadand thespecificmechanismsofathreat.Thisimpliesthatasim-
assistingintheidentificationofnewpayloads. plesystemthatcaptureslessdatamayactuallybemoreef-
fective then a complex system producing large amounts of
• The deployment and demonstration of the IMS on data. In other words, it is possible to trade in-depth threat
production networks. The current IMS deployment informationfortheabilitytogainadditionalvisibility.
consists of 28 monitored blocks at 18 physical instal- The tradeoff of visibility over in-depth threat informa-
lations. Thesedeploymentsrangeinsizefroma/25to tion motivates the architecture described in this section.
a /8 and include major service providers, large enter- The IMS consist of a set of distributed blackhole sensors,
prises, academic networks, and broadband providers. each monitoring a dedicated range of unused IP address
These sensors represent a range of organizations and space. Because there are no legitimate hosts in an unused
a diverse sample of routable IPv4 space. Data gath- address block, traffic must be the result of misconfigura-
ered from these deployments is used to demonstrate tion, backscatter from spoofed source addresses, or scan-
theabilityoftheIMStocaptureandcharacterizesev- ningfromwormsandotherprobing. Theblackholesensors
eralimportantInternetthreats. in the IMS have an active and a passive component. Thepassivecomponentrecordspacketssenttothesensor’sad-
dress space and the active component responds to specific
packetstoelicitmoredatafromthesource.
The active component is designed to elicit the first pay-
load of data across the major protocols (TCP, UDP, and
ICMP). UDP is a connectionless protocols so application-
leveldataissentwithoutthereceivereverresponding. For
example, the Witty [21] and Slammer [12] worms were
basedonUDPinwhichtheentirewormpayloadwastrans-
mitted in the first packet. TCP, on the other hand, is
a connection-oriented protocol and requires an active re-
sponse to elicit any payload data. The IMS uses a simple
lightweightactiverespondertoestablishaTCPconnection
and capture payload data on TCP worms like Blaster [16]
andSasser[8]. ICMPdataispassivelycollected.
Figure2.Averagepacketrate(5minutebins)
Storing the full payload for every packet has significant
as seen by ten IMS Blackhole sensors over
space requirements, so the IMS uses a novel payload stor-
onemonth,normalizedby/24
age approach. When a blackhole sensor receives a packet
withapayload,itfirstcomputestheMD5checksumofthe
payload(withoutnetworkheaders)andcomparesitagainst
thechecksumofalltheotherpacketsithasseeninthepast
various sizes and placed in a variety of topologically di-
day.Ifthechecksum(signature),hasalreadybeenrecorded,
verselocations. Whilepreviousattemptsatmonitoringun-
thecapturecomponentlogsthesignaturebutdoesnotstore
usedaddressblockhavefocusedonthreeorfeweraddress
the payload. If the signature is new, the payload is stored
blocks [22, 11, 32, 17], our approach is to be widely dis-
andthesignatureisaddedtothedatabaseofsignaturesseen
tributed. Thisarchitecturalchoicehastwokeyadvantages;
inthatday.
greatervisibilityintodistanteventsandbroadercoverageof
Thisarchitectureoffersthreenovelcontribibutions:
threats.
• DistributedMonitoringInfrastructure: TheIMSis Using the analogy of Astrometric Telescopes, Moore in
designed from the ground up for distributed deploy- [11] notes that the greater the size of a light telescope, the
menttoincreasevisibilityintoglobalthreats,including greater the visibility into fainter, smaller, further and older
thosethatmayillustratetargetingpreferences. objects. Moore notes that the more address space moni-
tored (for random scanning events) the better the insight
• LightweightActiveResponder:Theactiveresponder into shorter lived or lower rate events. The conclusion is
isdesignedtomaintainalevelofinteractivitythatcan thathavinglargeaddressblocksisimportantformonitoring
differentiatetrafficonthesameserviceindependentof globallyscopedevents. Inadditiontowideaddressblocks,
applicationsemantics. ThisenablesIMStocharacter- Moorealsosuggestsdistributedblocksasamethodforin-
izethreatsonemergentportsandserviceswithoutad- creasingvisibility.
ditionaldeploymentsorscripting. Distributedsensorsprovidemoreaddressesthatincrease
visibilityandalsoanotherimportantbenefit,broadercover-
• Payload Signatures and Caching: The IMS check-
age of threats. Previous work [7] has noted the surprising
sums and caches commonly seen packets such that
findingthatdarkaddressmonitorscanseestrikinglydiffer-
only new payloads need be stored. This saves signif-
ent behaviors, even when local-preference scanning is re-
icant storage resources and enables a simple mecha-
moved.
nismforidentifyingnewpayloads.
As an example, consider the packet rate observed by a
collectionofsensors. Figure2showstheamountoftraffic
The following three subsections describe and validate
over all protocols and services observed by ten blackhole
thesenovelcomponentsofthearchitecturebyshowingthem
sensors. Packetsarenormalizedbythesizeofa/24sosen-
inthecontextofa28addressblock,distributedIMSdeploy-
sorscoveringdifferentsizedblockscanbecompared. Nor-
ment.
malization is performed such that the magnitude seen in a
/23wouldbedividedbytwoandtrafficina/25multiplied
2.1 DistributedBlackholeNetwork
bytwo.
A key contribution of the IMS is the creation of a large Figure 2 shows that the amount of traffic varies dramat-
distributed sensor network built from address blocks of ically and can differ by more than two orders of magni-TCP is a connection oriented protocol [27], no application
data is sent until after connection establishment. This has
twomajorrepercussionsforanyTCPbasedthreats;threats
to the same port can not be distinguished from each other,
andthreatswillnotsendtheexploitpayloadifaconnection
cannotbeestablished.
As an illustration, consider the Blaster worm [16]. The
infection and transmission method used by Blaster is rela-
tively complicated compared to a single-packet worm like
Slammer[12]. Acondenseddiagramofthetransactionsin-
volved in a Blaster infection is illustrated in Figure 4(a).
TheBlasterwormfirstopensaTCPconnectiontoport135
andsendsanRPCbindrequest. Next,anRPCrequestmes-
sageissentcontainingabufferoverflowandcodetoopena
backdoorportonTCPport4444. Thenewlyinfectedhost
Figure 3. Distribution of local preference ac-
thensendsamessageviathenewbackdoortodownloadthe
cross ten IMS blackhole sensors over one
wormpayloadandexecuteit.
month
Figure 4(b) depicts the transactions of the Blaster worm
ascapturedbyablackholesensorintheIMS.Observehow
asingleSYN-ACKonport135elicitsnotonlytheexploit,
tude between sensors. The local target selection of ma-
butalsoaSYNonthebackdoorport. SincetheIMSblack-
licious attackers or worms with local scanning preference
holesensorsrespondtoSYNpacketsonallports,theworm
in their scanning algorithms[26], such as Code Red II [3],
connects to port 4444 and sends commands to TFTP the
Nimda[2],andBlaster[16]arelikelycanidatesforthedif-
payloadandstartthewormbinary. Comparethedatacap-
ferenceinmagnitude. However,weshowthatthisisnotthe
tured by the IMS to the data recorded by a passive black-
case.
holemonitor,showninFigure4(c). Whileapassivemoni-
Figure 3 shows the percentage of traffic to all protocols
tormightcatchasinglepacketUDPwormlikeSapphire,it
andservicesfromthesamelocal/16andlocal/8asthesen-
willonlyseeSYNtrafficfromTCPwormslikeBlaster.The
sorwherethetrafficwasobserved. Therearetwoimportant
Blasterexampleillustratesthetwokeycontributionsofthe
implications of this graph. First, there are very different
lightweight reposnder; the ability to elicit payloads to dif-
relative amounts of local /8 traffic seen at the various sen-
ferentiatetrafficandtheabilitytogetresponsesacrossports
sors. Second, althoughsomesensorsseeaverysignificant
without application semantic information. The following
amount of normalized local /8 traffic, those blocks do not
subsectionsexploresthesepointsinmoredepth.
always correlate with the sensors with the greatest magni-
tude of overall traffic. For example, C/24 observes by far
2.2.1 DifferentiateServices
thegreatestamountoftraffic,butonlyapproximately10%
ofthattrafficisfromwithinthesame/8asthesensor. So, Animportantillustrationofthevalueinhavingmoreinfor-
even though local traffic can be significant, the major traf- mation is the extraction and classification of a new threat
fic differences are not due to local preference. Additional forahighlytraffickedservice. TheSasser[8]wormutilized
insights into these differences are discussed in [7]. Thus, TCP port 445, which is a used by many existing threats.
theimportantmessageinFigure2andFigure3isthatdif- BecausetheIMSwasabletoobtainandclassifytheSasser
ferentblackholesobservedifferentmagnitudesandtypesof payload, it was able to identify the traffic specific to this
traffic. newworm,showninFigure5. Figure5(a)showsthetraffic
The distributed nature of IMS affords us additional vis- capturedonport445overtheperiodof7days. Figure5(b)
ibility into global threats. This comes from our ability to showsonlythetrafficofthesignatureassociatedwithSasser
increaseaddressspacebeyondasinglewideaddressblock overthatsametimeperiod. Thus, theIMSisabletoiden-
aswellasthetopologicalandorganizationaldiversityofthe tifythepresenceofanewwormeveninanextremelynoisy
addressblocks. servicebyusingpayloadsignatures.
2.2 LightweightResponder
2.2.2 ServiceAgnostic
Another novel aspect of this work is the construction of Another advantage of the lightweight responder is its ser-
a lightweight responder whose main responsibility it is to viceagnosticapproachwhichenablesinsightintolesspop-
elicit payloads for TCP connections. Recall that because ularservices. Consider, forexample, amanagementappli-(a) (b) (c)
Figure4.Blasterinfectionattemptcapturedusingthreemonitoringtechniques
(a) (b)
Figure5.TheSasserwormasrecordedbyanIMS/24blackholesensorFigure 6. Change in activity on TCP ports Figure7.IMSandtcpdumplogfilesizesover
withoutwell-knownservices a16dayperiod
cation that may not be widely deployed. The population Whileresponsesacrossmostorallportsprovidesinsights
deployingthisservicemightonlybeseveralthousandhosts intopotentiallyunknownthreats,wewouldberemissifwe
ontheglobalInternetandtheobscurityoftheservicemay did not point out that this makes these sensors simple to
meanitisunmonitored. Anotherexampleoflesswellknow identify and fingerprint. One main advantage of this sys-
servicesarebackdoorportsonexistingwormsandviruses. temisitsfocusongloballyscopedthreatsovertheactivites
Newthreatsthatexploittheseobscureservicescanavoidde- forindividualattackers. Thistranslatesintoathreatmodel
tection by existing network monitoring tools because they whereby our biggest concern is the encoding of the moni-
do not have the appropriate service modules. In contrast, torednetworkblocksinthreat“no-hit-lists.”Thelargenum-
the IMS can detect and gather significant information on berofdistributedblocksofsmalltomediumsizemakesthis
this kind of threat. Consider Figure 6, which shows traffic propositiondifficult. Wehavenotseenanyevidencetodate
onTCPportswhichdonothavewellknownservices. This of this type of activity being encoded into self propgrat-
figureshowsthetop20portswhichhadsignificantchanges ingthreats. Nevertheless,weareexploringseveralwaysof
intrafficlevelsoverafivemonthperiod. Noteinparticular, discouraging fingerprinting including; sensor rotation (i.e.
ports2745and3127,whichrepresentservicesorbackdoors continuously moving the active responders to evade detec-
asdiscussedabove. tion), source squelching on individual sensors [17] or ac-
crosstheentiresystem(i.e. ifwedetectandrespondatone
sensor, we don’t have to send a response from other sen-
2.2.3 Limitations sors), orbuildingsimulatedhostsandtopology(asinhon-
eyd[19])tomaskthepresenceofablackhole.
The service agnostic lightweight responder is an novel
method of tracking emerging threats, however, itmay pro-
2.3 MD5 Checksuming and Caching of request
videlittleornoinformationonthethreatsthatdependonap-
payloads
plicationlevelresponses.Forexample,theNetBIOSservice
which runs on Windows systems requires an RPC bind() Thefinalnovelaspectofthissystemisitsmethodofstor-
before performing a RPC request() to execute many popu- ing payloads. When a blackhole sensor receives a packet
laroperations. Thus, anIMSsensormayobservetheRPC with a payload it first computes the MD5 checksum of the
bind()butnotthesubsequentRPCrequest()becausenoap- payload(withoutnetworkheaders)andcomparesitagainst
plication level response was ever sent. However, in some the checksum of all the other packets it has seen. If the
casesthethreatwillcontinuewithoutwaitingfortheappli- checksum,orsignature,hasalreadybeenrecorded,thepas-
cation level response. For example, the Blaster worm will sivecapturecomponentlogsthesignaturebutdoesnotstore
sendtheRPCbind()andRPCrequest()(containingtheex- the payload. If the signature is new, the payload is stored
ploit) without any application level response. In addition, andthesignatureisaddedtothedatabaseofsignaturesseen.
manythreatsperformoperationsonmultipleportsanditis This approach offers a factor of two savings in disk (Fig-
possible to track these threats by observing the pattern of ure7)andthehitrateonthesignaturecachetypicallytops
requestsacrossports. 96% (Figure 8). The implication is that a large number of2. Scanning: Because the IMS doesn’t rely on service
modules,itcandetectscanningactivitytargetedatless
wellknowserviceslikeworm/virusbackdoors.
3. DDoS: The distributed architecture enables observa-
tions of DDOS events including those that may not
generate much traffic or target a wide range of ad-
dresses.
3.1 DistributedDeployment
One key contribution of the IMS is its ability to support
a widely distributed deployment. The current deployment
consist of 28 distinct monitored blocks at 18 physical in-
stallations(seeTable3.1). Thesedeploymentsrangeinsize
Figure8.Signaturedatabasehitrateovera16 froma/25toa/8andincludemajorserviceproviders,large
dayperiodonthreeblackholesensors. Fluc- enterprises, academic networks, and broadband providers.
tuations in the hit rate in two of the sensors These sensors represent a range of organizations and a di-
correspondwithanattackonaMySQLServer verse sample of the routable IPv4 space including nine of
service allroutable/8addressranges.
The first version of the IMS was deployed in 2001 as
part of a global threat monitoring system developed by re-
the payloads seen each day are exactly the same. It is sur- searchers at Arbor Networks and the University of Michi-
prisingthatacachehitrateofgreaterthan96%onlyyields gan. This initial installation was built to monitor a /8 net-
a factor of two increase in savings, however, the payload work,orapproximately1/256thofthetotalIPv4space. Be-
distribution is heavily skewed to packets with little or no tween2001and2003thissystemprocessedseveralhundred
payload. petabytes of network data including recording millions of
The factor of two in storage savings helps significantly scanandbackscatterevents. Itwasabletocharacterizenu-
sincetracesgatheredona/8canreachover100GB/day. In merousInternetwormssuchasCodeRed,Nimda,Sapphire,
addition, checksuming every payload provides an efficient andBlaster. In2003thesystemwasupdatedandexpanded
signature system. For example, the signatures can be used torepresentthedistributedarchitecturepresentedinthispa-
to generate simple metrics for the amount of new data ob- per.
servedorasafirstpasstoamoreexpensivestringmatching ThecurrentIMSrevisioncontainslightweightresponders
algorithm. Insummary,theMD5checksumingandcaching acrossallportsandadataqueryenginetosupportdistribu-
system in IMS provides a factor of two in storage savings tion. The query system consists of a query daemon that
andasimple,fastsignaturemechanism. is installed on each sensor and listens for queries from a
portal server. The portal server acts as a query aggregator
forwardingqueriestoeachsensorandforwardingbackthe
3 DeploymentObservationsandExperiences
responses. The portal server also runs a web application
This section describes the realization of the IMS archi- thatutilizesthequerysystemtoprovidereal-timeviewsof
tecture. We describe the current distributed IMS deploy- threat traffic in the IMS sensor network. While, the query
ment consisting of 28 distinct address blocks at 18 physi- system is an interesting implementation on top of the IMS
calinstallations. Inaddition, wedemonstratetheabilityof architecture,itisbeyondthescopeofthispaper.
the IMS to capture and characterize several important In-
ternet threats that were previously not possible or difficult 3.2 InternetWorms
usingpassivemonitoringmethods. Threethreateventscap-
Internet worms represent a class of security threats that
turedusingtheIMSdeploymentarepresentedtoshowhow
seek to execute code on a target machine by exploiting
thelightweightresponders,payloadsignaturesandcaching,
vulnerabilities in the operating system or application soft-
andthedistributednatureoftheIMSenablenoveltypesof
ware[15,33]. Unlikeviruses,however,wormsdonotrely
globallyscopedanalyses.
onattachingthemselvestofilestopropagate.Rather,worms
1. InternetWorms: TheIMScandifferentiatescantraffic stand-alone and propagate by using the network to scan
from real worms on TCP ports allowing it to capture forotherpotentiallyvulnerablehostsandthenexploitthem
andstudyTCPwormslikeBlaster. withoutuserinteraction.Organization Size 20000
AcademicNetwork /24,/24
AcademicNetwork /24
15000
AcademicNetwork /24
AcademicNetwork /24
LargeEnterprise /18
10000
Tier1ISP /17
Tier1ISP /18
NationalISP /20,/21,/22
5000
NationalISP /24,/24,/24
NationalISP /24
NationalISP /24 0
2003-08-10 2003-08-12 2003-08-14 2003-08-16 2003-08-18
NationalISP /24,/24 Date
RegionalISP /25,/24,/24
RegionalISP /23,/22
RegionalISP /8
RegionalISP /24
BroadbandProvider /17,/18,/22
BroadbandProvider /24,/24
Table1.IMSDeployments
Globallyscopednetworkmonitoringsystems,suchasthe
IMS,arehelpfulincharacterizing, measuringandtracking
these threats. The IMS has been able to provide valuable
insightintoavarietyofwormbehaviors,including:
• WormVirulence.Howmuchtrafficresultedfromthis
worm? Whatroutersorpathsweremostcongestedby
thisworm?
• Worm Demographics. How many hosts were in-
fected?Wherearethesehostsgeographically,topolog-
ically, and organizationally? What operating system
aretheinfectedhostsrunning? Whatistheiravailable
bandwidth?
• Worm Propagation. How does the worm select its
nexttarget?
• Community response. How quickly was policy em-
ployed? Which organizations were affected quickest
andwhorespondedquickest? Whoisstillinfected?
As an example of the type of analysis made possible by
theIMS,considerthefollowingbriefanalysisoftheBlaster
worm. The Blaster worm affected Windows 2000 and XP
systems running DCOM RPC services and used a publi-
cizedbufferoverflowvulnerabilitytorunarbitrarycodeon
the target machine. The worm would generate an address
toinfect(60%wererandomlygeneratedand40%werelo-
catedwithinthesamehost/16networkastheaffectedsys-
tem).Thewormwouldthensequentiallyscanfromthecho-
senaddress. TheIMSwasabletomeasurethereleaseand
)sesserdda
PI
euqinu(
ruoH
rep
ytivitcA
retsalB
Growth
Decay
Persistance
Figure9.AsnapshotofBlasterwormshowing
thethreephasesofthewormlifecycle
propagation of the Blaster worm as it attempted to infect
randomhosts.
The7-dayperiodofobservationssurroundingtherelease
of the Blaster worm indicates a clear 3-phased cycle. Fig-
ure 9 illustrates the three phases using the number SYNs
to TCP port 135 on a /8 (the active responder was not yet
operational). The first worm phase is the growth phase in
whichthenumberofscansincreasedfromabaselinerateto
hundredsofthousandsperhour.Thesecondphaseisthede-
cayphaseinwhichinthenumberofobservedprobesdrops
aslarge-scalefilteringwasimplementedtohalttheworm’s
spreadandcleanupstarted. Thethirdphaseofwormactiv-
ityisthepersistencephasewhichfortheBlasterwormhas
continuedthrough2004.
Inthisone-weekperiodofmeasurement,theIMSsystem
observed over 286,000 unique IP addresses displaying the
characteristics of Blaster activity. Inspection of the DNS
top-level domains (TLD) from the reverse lookups shows
thatthe.netand.comdomainswerehitmostheavily, with
.jpasthethirdmorepopularuniqueTLD.Furthermore,ap-
proximately10%ofthehostsobservedwereidentifiableas
dynamicallyassignedaddresses.
Atitshighestpace,theBlasterwormwasspreadingwith
a doubling time of less than 2.3 hours. This value may
beoverestimatedduetothetruncatedpropagationphaseof
the worm. Fitting a sigmoidal population growth equation
to this phase of the data shows a maximal growth rate of
40,000hostsperhour. Thesecondmajorphaseofthedata
collectionmonitoredthecontainmentoftheBlasterworm.
Starting within 8 hours of the worm’s initial outbreak, the
numberofuniquehostsper-hourscanningforTCPport135
began to diminish. This loss of activity fits a simple ex-
ponentialdecaymodel. Thehalf-lifeoftheseobservations
is approximately 10.4 hours and continued for five days,
throughtheendoftheworkweek.3.3 Scanning
Thesecondexampleofanalysisenabledbythisarchitec-
turefocusesonscanactivity. Scanningofnetworkedcom-
puters has been around almost as long as networked com-
putershaveexisted. Benigntypesofscanswereoriginally
used to verify network connectivity (ICMP) or forwarding
paths. As applications and services began to use the net-
work,scansforpotentialvulnerabilitiesweredeveloped.In-
dividualslookingforservicesthatwerevulnerabletoattack
scannednetworks,exploitedthoseservers,andgainedcon-
trol of the computing resources. With the advent of auto-
rooters, and complex scanning tools, probes to networks
from other machine on the Internet are now a routine oc-
currence.
Figure10.CircadianpatterninuniqueBlaster
One artifact of more recent worms is that after compro-
hostsovera7dayperiodinJuly2004
misingasystem,thesewormscommonlyinstallbackdoors
inthesystemtheyinfect.Thesebackdoorshavelongbeena
hypotheticalsourceofpersonaldata, computationandnet-
work resources. The IMS has the ability to respond as if
Continued Blaster activity displays a circadian pattern, thesenewserviceswererunning,allowingthecollectionof
with peak activity occurring near 05:00 GMT as shown in thescanpayload. Aninterestingapplicationofthisdatahas
Figure 10. The unique Blaster IPs shown in the graph are beenininvestigatingthedegreetowhichhackershavebeen
identifiedasBlasterhostsbutacommandsequencespecific trying to utilize this potential resource through secondary
to Blaster on the Blaster backdoor port on TCP port 4444. infections.
ThusahostisonlyidentifiedasaBlasterhostifitfirstsends Starting on approximately March 20, 2004, IMS began
theexploitonTCPport135andthenfollowswiththecom- trackingsignificantamountsofscanningonbackdoorports
mand sequence on TCP port 4444. Figure 10 shows be- left by widespread variants of the Bagle [30] and My-
tween100and350uniqueBlasterhostsper5minuteperiod Doom [1] mail-based worms. The patterns of sources for
overa7dayperiodinJuly2004. Thispatternistypicalof this traffic show that they are widespread. The payloads
Blastertrafficobservedsinceitsinception. Thepatternsug- identifiedsuggestthatthesehostsmaybeunderattackfrom
geststhatthesesourcesarepower-cycledeverydayanddo anotherwormsuchasAgoBot[31]oropportunisticattack-
not remain on continuously. An inspection of the reverse ers such as those looking to build armies of compromised
DNSentriesforthesehostsindicatesaglobalsourcedistri- computers.
bution. BagleandMyDoomarefamiliesofSMTP-basedworms
TheBlasterwormwasnotasaggressiveastheSlammer thatbeganspreadinginearly2004andpropagatedviamass
or Witty worms, but it did spread at a pace comparable to mailerroutines.Bothofthesemail-basedwormshavemany
worms such as Code Red and Nimda. Its appearance and variants that have rapidly appeared in a short time span,
continued presence on the Internet shows the scope of any with new variants appearing almost daily. The relation-
wormeventontheInternet. shipbetweenthesefamiliesisinterestingandrevealsafight
TheaboveBlasteranalysisillustrateshowIMSprovides in the virus world between authors. Some of these mail-
additionalinsightintohighlysalientthreats. Blasterutilizes based worms attempted to uninstall the others, disrupting
TCPasatransportprotocolandthusattemptingtotrackand theirspread.
characterizeitusingapassiveblackholemonitorisdifficult Each of these malware families listen on TCP ports as a
or more often impossible. A passive monitor will detect backdoormechanismforremotecontrolofthehosts. Inthe
the SYN packet but not the worm payload making it very caseofmanyoftheBaglevariants,itisTCPport2745. In
hard to differentiate the worm traffic from scans and other the case of the MyDoom family of mail-based worms this
traffic on that port. In addition, because IMS gets the first portistypicallyTCPport3127. Accesstotheseportscould
payload,andoftentrafficonfollowupports(likeportTCP be used to upload arbitrary software to an affected host or
port4444forBlaster),IMSprovidesenoughdatatodiffer- toexecutearbitrarycommands.
entiate between the different variant of worms. Differenti- Figure 11 shows the scan traffic for 2745/TCP and
atingbetweenthevariantsofBlasterwaspossibleusingthe 3127/TCP over a one week period starting March 20th of
commandpacketsreceivedonTCPport4444. Thistypeof 2004 as observed by one /24 IMS Sensor. Scans against
analysisisnotpossiblewithapassiveblackholemonitor. other ports open by the Bagle variants (including 6777 for4000
3000
2000
1000
0
03-22-2004 03-24-2004 03-26-2004 03-28-2004
Time(EST)
sesserddA
PI
euqinU
evitalumuC
TCP 2745 and 3127 Scanning Activity
TCP/2745
TCP/3127
Figure 11. Propagation of 2745/TCP and
3127/TCP scanning. This figure shows the
cumulative number of source IP addresses
contacting these ports over a one week pe-
riodasobservedbyone/24sensor
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
03-22-2004 03-24-2004 03-26-2004 03-28-2004
Time(EST)
sesserddA
PI
euqinU
evitalumuC
43 ff ff ff 30 30 30 01 0a 28 91 a1 2b e6 60
2f 32 8f 60 15 1a 20 1a 00
Figure13.Toppayloadagainstport2745/TCP
seen in scanning. This hexdump shows
the most frequently observed payload of the
scansagainst2745/TCP
three datasets represent three distinct definitions of over-
lapping; source addresses that scan both ports within the
samehour,withinthesameday,andwithinthesameweek.
Thisviewshowsustwointerestingfacts. Firstsourcesthat
scanned one port did not scan the other port in the same
hour indicating that these were not lock step scans. Sec-
ondly, when observered over the course of a week, nearly
allsourcesscannedbothports,indicatingthatwhilethetar-
getselectionswereindependentofeachother,thesamepool
ofsourceaddresseswerebeingusedforbothscans.
The top payload captured using IMS on port 2745/TCP
(backdoorportsleftbytheBagle.C-GandBagle.J-Kmail-
basedworms)isshowninFigure13.Notethatthesignature
inFigure13differsfromtheBagleremovalmechanismde-
IP Addresses that Scanned both 2745 and 3127 scribedbyJoeStewart[28]. Thesimilarityofthefirstfour
bytes (0x43 0xff 0xff 0xff) must be noted; after that point
Overlap within a Day the signatures are divergent. This may indicate a common
Overlap within a Hour
Overlap within a Week commandorauthenticationbytesequence.
ThetoppayloadfortheMyDoomwormscans(targetport
is3127/TCP)appearstobeaUPXpackedbinary,suggest-
ing new software is being uploaded. The origin and func-
tion of this binary is unknown. Both the source and desti-
nations of these scans against TCP port 3127 appear to be
widespread. Sourcesareinmanyglobalnetworks,typically
inconsumerbroadbandnetworksandacademicnetworks.
The activity on the Bagle and MyDoom backdoor ports
captured by the IMS clearly demonstrates the value of the
lightweight responder. Without the ability to respond as
Figure 12. IP address overlap between if these new services were running, the IMS would never
2745/TCP and 3127/TCP sources. The three havebeenabletocollectthepayloadandanalyzethisactiv-
datasetsshowtheaddressesthatareconsid- ity. This event also shows the advantage of using a sim-
eredoverlappingiftheyscanbothportsinthe ple lightweight responder over handcrafted service mod-
samehour,thesameday,orthesameweek ules. Becausethebackdoorsobservedwerefromrelatively
new worms having a huge number of variants, it would be
extremely time consuming to create services modules for
eachvariantintimetocapturetheseevents.
Bagle.A, 8866 for Bagle.B, and 11117 for Bagle.L) have
notbeenobservedinanyappreciablequantities.Inaddition,
3.4 DistributedDenialofServiceAttacks
theIMShasnotobservedsignificantactivityinthistimepe-
riodagainstadditionalMyDoomports,includingTCPports ThefinaleventpresentedhereexhibitshowIMShasvis-
3128-3198. ibility into Denial of Service attacks. Denial of Service
Whilethesimiliarmagnitudeandshapeofthedatasetsin attacks seek to deny legitimate users access to resources.
Figure 11 may suggest that these scans are occuring con- Denyingservicetypicallytakestheformofeithercrashing
curently from the same souorce addresses, this is actually acomputingresourcethroughsomebuginthesoftwareim-
notthecase.Figure 12showsthecumulativeuniquesource plementationorbyconsumingafiniteresource. Distributed
addressesthatscannedboth2745/TCPand3127/TCP.The DenialofServiceattacks(DDoS)areasubsetofthisclass20000
15000
10000
5000
000 :00:00 01:12:00 02:24:00 03:36:00 04:48:00 06:00:00 07:12:00 08:24:00 09:36:00 10:48:00 12:00:00
Time(EST)
etuniM
rep
stekcaP
diversity. Becauseattacksmayrandomizetheirsourcesad-
Backscatter from the SCO DDoS Attacks
dresses over the entire Internet, smaller swaths of address
December 11th, 2003
spacemaynotbeabletoaccuratelydeterminethescopeand
FTP
HTTP magnitudeofanattack(e.g. a/24mayonlysee.000005%
ofthebackscatter,whilea/8maysee.5%).
4 RelatedWork
With so many threats to global Internet security, charac-
terizing, monitoring, and tracking these threats is quickly
becoming critical to the smooth running of individual or-
ganizations and the Internet as a whole. Traditionally, ap-
proachestothreatmonitoringfallintotwobroadcategories,
hostbasedmonitoringandnetworkbasedmonitoring.
Antivirus software [5] and Host Based intrusion detec-
Figure 14. The two largest events of the De- tion systems [9] seek to alert users of malicious code ex-
cember2003SCODDoSattacks. ecution on the target machine by watching for patterns of
behavior or signatures of known attacks. Host based hon-
eypots [4, 6] track threats by providing an exploitable re-
source and monitoring it for abnormal behavior. A major
Table2.DiscreteDDoSeventstargetingSCO
goalofhoneypots[24]istoprovideinsightintomotivation
Start Duration Typeofattack
Dec.10, 902minutes SYNfloodport80, andtechniquesbehindthesethreats. Whilethesehostbased
16:24EST, www.sco.com, monitoringtechniquescanprovidedetailedinformationon
Dec.11, 480minutes SYNfloodport21,
05:49EST, ftp.sco.com, threats, they are limited in their ability to scale to monitor
Dec.11, 16minutes SYNfloodport25, largeaddressblocks.
05:51EST, mail.ut.caldera.com,
Dec.11, 27minutes SYNfloodport80, The alternative to host based monitoring techniques is
07:28EST, www.sco.com, to monitor from the network perspective. By far the most
Dec.12, 13minutes SYNfloodport80,
12:23EST, www.sco.com, commontechniqueisthepassivemeasurementoflivenet-
works. In contrast to active techniques, passive network
monitoring approaches attempt not to intrude on the exist-
ofattacksthatrelyonatypicallylargenumberofendhosts ingoperationofthenetwork. Thiscanbeaccomplishedby
toconsumenetworkresources(e.g.hostconnectionqueues, monitoring data from existing security or policy enforce-
availablelinkbandwidth). ment devices. By either watching firewall logs, looking
On December 10, 2003, shortly after 4PM EST a long- for policy violations, or by aggregating IDS alerts across
lived denial of service attack began against a single web multipleenterprises[20,34], onecaninferinformationre-
server address for The SCO Group (www.sco.com). The gardingaworm’sspread. Otherpolicyenforcementmech-
twolargestcomponentsofthisattackcanbeseeninFigure anisms, suchasrouterACLsprovidecourse-grainedinfor-
14.Becausetheseattacksutilizedspoofedsourceaddresses, mation about blocked packets. Instead of dropping these
theIMSsystemwasabletoobservesomeofthebackscatter packets,CenterTrack[29]leveragedtheexistingroutingin-
fromtheattacks.Thedetectionsystemclassifiedtheattacks frastructure to collect denial of service traffic for analysis.
as5discreteevents. Threeoftheseeventswereagainstthe Datacollectiontechniquesfromtrafficplanningtoolsoffer
webserversforTheSCOGroup,onewasagainsttheirFTP another rich area of pre-existing network instrumentation
server, andonewasagainsttheirSMTPserver. Additional useful in characterizing threats. Course-grained interface
analysissuchassourcehostfingerprintingthroughpassive counters and more fine-grained flow analysis tools such as
techniquesandTTLbaseddistancemeasurementsofattack- NetFlow[10]offeranotherreadilyavailablesourceofinfor-
ing populations are not presented, but represent part of a mation. While monitoring live networks provides broader
spectrumofanalysisenabledbyIMS. coverage, these techniques often face difficulties in distin-
TheeventsdepictedinTable2illustratethatDDoSevents guishingbetweenbenignandmalicioustraffic.
canbelonglivedandmadeupofseveralsmallereventsthat Another interesting network monitoring approach is to
canbecombinedtocreatelargerattacks. Furthermore,this passively collect data from traffic to unused (or dark) ad-
event shows that attacks using spoofed source address are dress space. Because this space has no legitimate hosts,
stillinuse. trafficdestinedtothespaceistheresultofmaliciousactivity
Denialofserviceattacksrepresentaninterestingdemon- ormisconfiguration. Themostcommonapplicationofthis
stration of the utility of the IMS and the need for address techniqueistheglobalannouncementandroutingofunusedspacetoacollectioninfrastructurethatrecordstheincoming network with a lightweight responder and a novel payload
packets [11, 14, 23]. In contrast to host based techniques, signatureandcachingmechanism. Together,thesecapabili-
passively monitoring unused address space is able to scale tiesaffordnewinsightintoInternetworms,denialofservice
toverylargeaddressspacesattheexpenseofnotgathering attacks,andmaliciousscanactivity.
detailsaboutspecificevents. First, wepresentedtheIMSarchitectureandhighlighted
Thefinalnetworkedmonitoringapproachusesactivenet- the innovative capacities of the system. The distributed
work perturbation to determine the scope and propagation blackholenetworkallowsincreasedvisabilityintomoredis-
of threats. This is typically done to elicit a behavior that tant events. The lightweight responder is designed to dif-
is only visible by participating in a network or application ferentiate traffic services while remaining independent of
session. Projects like honeynet [25] and iSink [32], and application semantics. Finally, the payload signature and
software like honeyd [19] are used to bring up networks caching mechanism reduces the overhead associated with
ofhoneypots;placesdesignedtocaptureinformationabout storingrequestpayloads.
intrusions in a controlled environments. These techniques Wethenpresentedthisarchitectureinthecontextofa28
attempt to balance the scalability of dark address monitors block, 18 organization distributed deployment. Highlight-
whilegatheringmoredetailedinformationaboutthreats. ing the innovative capabilities of IMS, we examined three
Thetechniquesdescribedaboveprovidevaryingamounts distinctlarge-scaleeventsincluding,theBlasterworm(Au-
of intelligence regarding a threat. Some systems capture gust2003),theBaglebackdoorscanning(March2004),and
alltheeventsinvolvedinaparticularincidentwhileothers theSCOdenialofserviceattacks(December2003).
recordonlyaconnectionattempt. Somesystemsonlyhave There remain several interesting issues that would en-
visibilityintolocalevents,whileotherarecapableofmon- hance the capabilities of the IMS. First, we are interested
itoring globally scoped threats. These tradeoffs, which we intheissueoffingerprintingtheblackholesensorandinclu-
refer to as depth and breadth, are bounded by their associ- sion in blacklists. We wish to examine several of the anti-
atedcosts. fingerprinting techniques discussed in Section 2. Second,
Breadthreferstotheabilityofthesystemtodetectthreats we wish to further explore the tradeoffs between breadth
acrosshostsandacrossoperationalandgeographicbound- and depth of threat monitoring architectures. The most
aries. Atoneextremeofthebreadthaxisisthethreatview promisingimprovementbeingthecreationofahybridsys-
ofasinglehostwhileattheotheristheviewofallnetwork- tem that combines host-based sensors with wide address
based threats on a global scale. One early approach to spacemonitors.Finally,wehopetodevelopadditionaltech-
achieving globally scoped visibility was the measurement niquesforcharacterizingattackers. Techniquessuchaspas-
of wide address blocks [11, 32, 23]. This technique is at- sive OS fingerprinting [18] and firepower calculations will
tractive in that it can easily view a large percentage of the provideadditionalinformationabout thescopeandimpact
total IPv4 address space and has been effective at charac- ofanongoingattack.
terizingnewthreats[12,21]. However,giventhefinitesize
of the IPv4 address space, it is important to explore new Acknowledgments
methodsofobtainingbreadth. TheIMSaddressestheissue
This work was supported by the Advanced Research
ofbreathbycreatingadistributedarchitectureconsistingof
andDevelopmentActivity(ARDA)undercontractnumber
numeroustopologicallydiversesensors.
NBCHC030104.
Depth defines the extent to which a sensor emulates the
TheauthorswouldliketothankalltheIMSparticipants
services and characteristic of a real host, similar to the in-
fortheirhelpandsuggestions. Wewouldalsoliketothank
teractionspectruminhoneypots[24].Atoneextremeofthe
Arbor Networks and Larry Blunk, Bert Rossi, and Man-
depthaxisisaninstrumentedlivehostwhileattheotheris
ish Karir at Merit Network for their assistance and sup-
the completely passive capture of packets. Multiple points
port through this paper. The IMS project had its roots in
in this spectrum can be utilized simultaneously, as shown
an earlier system created by Dug Song, Robert Stone, and
byBarfordetal.[32].TheIMS,however,usesanextension
G.RobertMalan.
topassivetechniques[11]thatgainsadditionalintelligence
without emulating services to the extent of previous active
References
methods[25,19].
[1] CERT. Incident Note IN-2004-01: W32/Novarg.A Virus.
5 Conclusion http://www.cert.org/incident_notes/IN-2004-01.
html,2004.
This paper describe the Internet Motion Sensor, a dis-
[2] CERT Coordination Center. CERT Advisory CA-2001-26
tributed, globally scoped, Internet threat monitoring sys-
NimdaWorm. 2001.
tem. Withrootsinwide,darkaddressmonitoring,theIMS [3] CERT Coordination Center. Code Red II: Another
extendsthesetechniquestoincludeadistributedblackhole Worm Exploiting Buffer Overflow In IIS Indexing Ser-viceDLL.Availableathttp://www.cert.org/incident_ [19] N.Provos. Honeyd—Avirtualhoneypotdaemon. In10th
notes/IN-2001-09.html,2001. DFN-CERTWorkshop,Hamburg,Germany,Feb.2003.
[4] B.Cheswick. AneveningwithBerferdinwhichacracker [20] SANS. Sans - Internet storm center - cooperative cyber
islured,endured,andstudied. InProceedingsoftheWinter threatmonitorandalertsystem,June2004.
1992USENIXConference:January20—January24,1992, [21] C. Shannon and D. Moore. The spread of the Witty
San Francisco, California, pages 163–174, Berkeley, CA, worm. http://www.caida.org/analysis/secuirty/
USA,Winter1992. witty/,June2004.
[5] F.Cohen.AShortCourseonComputerViruses.JohnWiley [22] D.Song,R.Malan,andR.Stone.AsnapshotofglobalInter-
&Sons,2ndedition,April1994. networmactivity.FIRSTConferenceonComputerSecurity
[6] F.Cohen. Thedeceptiontoolkit(DTK). http://www.all. IncidentHandlingandResponse2002,June2002.
net/dtk/dtk.html,June2004. [23] D.Song,R.Malan,andR.Stone. AsnapshotofglobalIn-
[7] E.Cooke,M.Bailey,Z.M.Mao,D.Watson,andF.Jahanian. ternetwormactivity.ArborNetworkTechnicalReport,June
Toward understanding distributed blackhole placement. In 2002.
ProcofACMCCSWorkshoponRapidMalcode,pages54– [24] L.Spitzner.Honeypots:TrackingHackers.Addison-Wesley,
64.ACMPress,October2004. 2002.
[8] M. Corporation. What you should know about the [25] L.Spitzneretal. Thehoneynetproject. http://project.
Sasser worm. http://www.microsoft.com/security/ honeynet.org/,June2004.
incident/sasser.mspx,May2004. [26] S.Staniford,V.Paxson,andN.Weaver. Howto0wntheIn-
[9] S.Forrest,S.A.Hofmeyr,A.Somayaji,andT.A.Longstaff. ternetinyoursparetime.InProceedingsofthe11thUSENIX
A sense of self for Unix processes. In Proceedings of SecuritySymposium.USENIX,Aug.2002.
theIEEESymposiumonResearchinSecurityandPrivacy, [27] W.R.Stevens.TCP/IPIllustrated,Volume1:TheProtocols.
pages120–128,Oakland,CA,May1996. AddisonWesley,1994.
[10] C. S. Inc. Netflow services and applications. 2002. [28] J. Stewart. [full-disclosure] [fwd: [th-research] bagle re-
http://www.cisco.com/warp/public/cc/pd/iosw/ moteuninstall]. http://lists.netsys.com/pipermail/
ioft/neflct/tech/napps_wp.htm. full-disclosure/2004-January/015970.html, Jan-
[11] D.Moore. Networktelescopes: Observingsmallordistant uary2004.
security events. In 11th USENIX Security Symposium, In- [29] R.Stone. CenterTrack: AnIPoverlaynetworkfortracking
vitedtalk,SanFrancisco,CA,Aug. 5–92002.Unpublished. DoSfloods,2000.
[12] D.Moore,V.Paxson,S.Savage,C.Shannon,S.Staniford, [30] Symantec. Security Response - W32.Beagle.A.
http://securityresponse.symantec.com/avcenter/
andN.Weaver.InsidetheSlammerworm.IEEESecurity&
Privacy,1(4):33–39,2003.
venc/data/w32.beagle.a@mm.html,2004.
[13] D. Moore, C. Shannon, G. M. Voelker, and S. Savage. [31] I. Trend Micro. WORM AGOBOT.GEN - Description
Networktelescopes. http://www.caida.org/outreach/ and solution. http://www.trendmicro.com/vinfo/
papers/2004/tr-2004-04/,July2004. virusencyclo/default5.asp?VName=WORM_AGOBOT.
[14] D. Moore, G. M. Voelker, and S. Savage. Inferring In-
GEN,2003.
ternet denial-of-service activity. In Proceedings of the [32] P.B.VinodYegneswaranandD.Plonka. Onthedesignand
TenthUSENIXSecuritySymposium, pages9–22, Washing- useofInternetsinksfornetworkabusemonitoring. InRe-
ton,D.C.,Aug.13–172001. cent Advances in Intrusion Detection—Proceedings of the
[15] J.Nazario.DefenseanddetectionstrategiesagainstInternet 7thInternationalSymposium(RAID2004),SophiaAntipo-
worms. Artech,2004. lis,FrenchRiviera,France,Oct.2004.
[16] J. Nazario, M. Bailey, and F. Jahanian. The spread of the [33] N.Weaver,V.Paxson,S.Staniford,andR.Cunningham. A
Blasterworm. Submittedforpublication. TaxonomyofComputerWorms.InProcofACMCCSWork-
[17] R. Pang, V. Yegneswaran, P. Barford, V. Paxson, and shoponRapidMalcode,pages11–18.ACMPress,October
L. Peterson. Characteristics of internet background ra- 2003.
diation. http://www.cs.princeton.edu/nsg/papers/ [34] V. Yegneswaran, P. Barford, and S. Jha. Global intrusion
telescope.pdf,June2004. detectionintheDOMINOoverlaysystem.InProceedingsof
[18] T.H.Project. KnowYourEnemy: PassiveFingerprinting, NetworkandDistributedSystemSecuritySymposium(NDSS
Identifyingremotehosts,withoutthemknowing. 2002. ’04),SanDiego,CA,February2004.