Wi-Fly? : Detecting Privacy Invasion Attacks by
Consumer Drones
Simon Birnbach Richard Baker Ivan Martinovic
University of Oxford University of Oxford University of Oxford
simon.birnbach@cs.ox.ac.uk richard.baker@cs.ox.ac.uk ivan.martinovic@cs.ox.ac.uk
Abstract—Dronesarebecomingincreasinglypopularforhob- The retail tracking service NPD Group has reported that
byists and recreational use. But with this surge in popularity consumer UAV sales have grown by 224% to almost $200
comes increased risk to privacy as the technology makes it easy millioninthetimefromApril2015toApril2016andthatthe
to spy on people in otherwise-private environments, such as salesgrowthwasacceleratingoverthisperiod[14].According
an individual’s home. An attacker can fly a drone over fences
to the US American Federal Aviation Administration (FAA),
and walls in order to observe the inside of a house, without
1.9 million small UAVs, more commonly known as drones,
having physical access. Existing drone detection systems require
weresoldin2016ontheUShobbyistmarketalone.TheFAA
specialist hardware and expensive deployment efforts; making
predicts that the number of annual sales will increase to 4.3
them inaccessible to the general public.
million units by 2020 [2].
Inthisworkwepresentadronedetectionsystemthatrequires
minimalpriorconfigurationandusesinexpensivecommercialoff- ButthisprevalenceofconsumerUAVsisnotwithoutrisks.
the-shelf(COTS)hardwaretodetectdronesthatarecarryingout Over the past few years incidents at high-security facilities
privacy invasion attacks. We use a model of the attack structure have occurred with increasing frequency. Prisons have to deal
toderivestatisticalmetricsformovementandproximity,thatare with drones dropping weapons and other contraband into
thenappliedtoreceivedcommunicationsbetweenadroneandits
prison yards [8], drug smugglers use them to carry their
controller. We tested our system in real world experiments with
goods over borders [9], and the American Secret Service
two popular consumer drone models mounting privacy invasion
repeatedly had to deal with people who managed to bypass
attacks using a range of flight patterns. We were able to both
security measures and crashed their drone on the White
detect the presence of a drone and identify which phase of
the privacy attack was in progress. Even in our worst-case we House lawn [22], [21]. Besides the danger that drones pose
detectedanattackbeforethedronewaswithin48mofitstarget. to restricted areas, there has been an increasing unease in
the general population about privacy invasion through drones
carrying high-fidelity camera equipment. As most consumer
models are outfitted with cameras for live-view video during
I. INTRODUCTION
flight, UAVs can fly over fences to see into nearby gardens or
A. Motivation even look into windows to observe the interior. In Seattle, a
woman called the police after spotting a drone flying in front
Small unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are becoming of her 26th-floor apartment window; observing her partially-
increasingly commonplace nowadays. Since the release of undressed inside [23]. Meanwhile, a man from Kentucky was
the Parrot AR.Drone in 2010, the use of these devices is arrested after shooting down a drone over his property. He
no longer restricted to military and commercial domains nor explained this act by saying that the drone was spying on his
enthusiasts, but has opened up to laymen as well. Advances sunbathing daughter [29].
in sensor design and image processing support sophisticated
flight-assistfeaturesthatmakepilotingUAVseasilyaccessible These and similar incidents have prompted reactions from
to hobbyists. This is further supported by the ubiquity of regulators, such as the FAA requiring since December 2015
smartphones and tablets, as these devices make convenient that drone owners register as drone operators in order to
controllers for consumer models. As consumers get a broader fly UAVs legally [3]. It has also led to a multitude of de-
choice with more affordable products coming out every year, fence mechanisms and detection systems being proposed (see
sales of UAVs for videography and recreational use are rising. Section I-B for an overview of existing methods), however
Most such UAVs are multirotor aircraft that use four or more these systems are mostly targeted at law enforcement and
rotors to fly and are able to hover in mid-air. larger companies. By contrast, we focus on threats to private
individuals. An attacker can launch a drone from a distant
location and fly it to an otherwise-inaccessible private area,
Permission to freely reproduce all or part of this paper for noncommercial such as outside a top-floor window within a walled garden,
purposes is granted provided that copies bear this notice and the full citation
and freely observe the occupants. The occupants require a
on the first page. Reproduction for commercial purposes is strictly prohibited
without the prior written consent of the Internet Society, the first-named author system that alerts them to the presence of an impending
(for reproduction of an entire paper only), and the author’s employer if the privacy invasion, with sufficient warning to allow them to
paper was prepared within the scope of employment. react accordingly. The system must be easy to deploy without
NDSS ’17, 26 February - 1 March 2017, San Diego, CA, USA
specialistknowledgeanddetectawidevarietyofdronesbased
Copyright 2017 Internet Society, ISBN 1-891562-46-0
http://dx.doi.org/10.14722/ndss.2017.23335 onintrinsicpropertiesofUAVactivity;bothtoberobusttotherapid pace of advancement in drone technology and to avoid Detection Drone Drone Dedrone2 OreliaDrone DomesticDrone
method Detector3 Shield4 Detector5 Countermeasures6
spurious alarms.
Audio Yes Yes Yes Yes No
Video No No Yes No No
In this work, we propose such a system that detects the
RF Yes No Yes No Yes
presence of a consumer UAV with live-video streaming being
used to invade someone’s privacy in their home. We make use TABLE I: Commercial drone detection systems. Comparison
of readily-available commercial, off-the-shelf (COTS) hard- based on [10] and respective product feature descriptions.
ware to measure the signal strength of the communication
between the drone and its controller; developing metrics that
identify signal properties inherent to drone flight. In doing so
Most of the aforementioned approaches are focused on
we make the following specific contributions:
the protection of high-security facilities; permitting the use
• Development of a model of UAV-based privacy- of expensive, specialist equipment, which is infeasible in a
invasion attacks domestic setting. As we are targeting such an environment,
we need to be able to use cheap COTS hardware. That is why
• Derivation of statistical metrics to identify drone
wefocusonusingtheradiofrequency(RF)signalofthedrone
movement and proximity
which can be detected using inexpensive consumer products.
• Proposal of mechanisms to overcome attempts by an
ThelocalisationofRFsignalsingeneralisawellstudiedtopic.
attackertoavoiddetection,suchasvaryingtheirspeed
Localisingdronesin3Dspacewouldallowonetodetectthem
or flight pattern
as flying transmitters. However, these methods usually need
• Reportingtheevaluationofoursysteminareal-world
several receivers and often rely on expensive equipment and
scenario using popular consumer drones
precise synchronisation between the receivers (see [20] for an
overview of signal localisation methods).
B. Related work
TheacademicworkonUAVdetectionwithmoreaffordable
In this section, we will first survey existing UAV detection methods is quite limited. Peacock and Johnstone [18] detect
methodsandsubsequentlygiveashortoverviewoveravailable drones by using protocol signatures from the drone’s Wi-Fi
defence mechanisms. connection. For this method to work, they have to rely on an
unencrypted connection between drone and controller, which
A traditional way to detect aircraft is through the use of
is not the case for newer models. They also discuss the use
radar; a staple of military and aircraft control for a long time.
of media access control (MAC) address prefixes by known
But conventional radar systems are not able to detect drones.
manufacturers to recognise transmitting drones. Although this
To detect small objects like drones, expensive high-frequency
is an easy and reliable method to detect manufacturers that
radar systems are necessary [11]. However, Boddhu et al. [5]
have their own MAC prefix range, it is only capable of
suggest that drones might be indistinguishable from birds for
detecting known drone models. As there is an ever-increasing
such a radar system as they have a comparable wing span.
variety of drone models, it gets more difficult to build and up-
They propose an approach that uses humans as sensors by
dateacomprehensivedatabaseofMACprefixes.Furthermore,
building a collaborative smartphone app that allows users to
some manufacturers use MAC prefixes that are not specific
share drone sightings. Their approach is more appropriate to
to them, e.g., if their camera system consists of the popular
target large-scale threats, and is not applicable for the defence
GoProcameras1 whicharewidelyusedontheirown.Buteven
of a single property against a nearby attacker.
when the MAC prefix of a drone manufacturer is detected,
Another way to detect drones is based on video cameras relying only on the presence of certain MAC addresses is not
andimageanalysis.Rozantsevetal.[19]detectsmallUAVsby enough to distinguish a neighbour turning on a drone in their
usingboththeirappearanceandmotioncues.Accordingtothe house from an actual privacy-invasion attack.
work by Busset et al. [6] the variety of drone shapes is chal-
lenging for appearance-based approaches, whereas methods Over the last few years, several companies have entered
basedonmotioncuesstrugglewithsimilaritiesbetweendrone the market for drone detection systems. With the exception of
and bird movement. Therefore, they propose using acoustic DomesticDroneCountermeasures,theirintendedtargetgroups
cameras to complement the use of video cameras. These are law enforcement agencies and security forces of larger
microphonearraysusethenoiseoftherotorstodetectdrones. companies. See Table I for a comparison of their detection
As they use specialised and expensive equipment for their methods. Domestic Drone Countermeasures use a mesh net-
system,thisisnotafeasiblesolutionfortheuseinadomestic work of receivers to establish the mobility of transmitters and
setting. Case et al. [7] designed a low-cost acoustic array to treat all unidentified moving transmitters as a threat. Our goal
detect small UAVs that can be built with COTS hardware. But inthiswork,ontheotherhand,isittodetectanactualprivacy
their system is also not easy to build and deploy as it requires invasion attack using only one inexpensive receiver.
anarrayof24microphones.Furthermore,thetotalcostoftheir
In our scenario, establishing line-of-sight to the receiver
systemstillamountsto$3768whichmakesitunaffordablefor
playsanimportantrole.Xiaoetal.[30]studiedthedetectionof
the general public.
Hybrid approaches such as CSUAV [28] combine radar,
1www.gopro.com
2www.dedrone.com
acoustic arrays and video cameras to profit from the benefits
3www.dronedetector.com
of all approaches. But while they improve the detection per-
4www.droneshield.com
formance, they also increase the complexity and cost of the 5www.drone-detector.com
system substantially. 6www.ddcountermeasures.com
2line-of-sight/non-line-of-sight (LOS/NLOS) conditions. How- Brand Model VideoDownlink Speed(m/s)
DJI8 Phantom3Standard Wi-Fi(2.4GHz) 16
ever, they are focused on an office setting with tighter control
Phantom3Advanced/Pro Lightbridge 16
overthetransmittersandmostoftheirmetricsrelyonsuchan Phantom4 Lightbridge 20
indoor environment. Furthermore, the transmitters are static in Parrot9 AR.Drone2.0 Wi-Fi(2.4GHz) 11.11
Bebop Wi-Fi(2.4,5.8GHz) 13
this work, whereas mobility is an intrinsic feature of drones.
Bebop2 Wi-Fi(2.4,5.8GHz) 18
The detection of moving transmitters has been investigated by Protocol10 DroniumOneWiFiEd. Wi-Fi(2.4GHz) N/A
Muthukrishnan et al. [17] which we will revisit in Section V. Yuneec11 TyphoonH Wi-Fi(5.8GHz) 13.5
TornadoH920 Wi-Fi(5.8GHz) 11.11
Once a drone has been detected acting maliciously, some 3DRobotics12 Solo Wi-Fi(2.4GHz) 24.6
IRIS+ Wi-Fioptional 22.7
set of countermeasures may be deployed. A vast array of
X8+ Wi-Fioptional 30
countermeasures have been proposed; from shotguns, through
flying nets [26], live eagles [1], control-signal jamming [13], TABLE II: Features of popular drones with live-view video.
Wi-Fide-authenticationattacks[18],flight-controllerexploita-
tion[15]andGPSspoofing[24],[13],tointerferencewithon-
board gyroscopes via acoustic resonance [25]. In a domestic
classes drones equipped with cameras as “small unmanned
setting,thecourseofactioncouldbeassimpleasautomatically
surveillance aircraft” and requires that they [4]:
shutting the blinds. The relative merits of each approach
warrant careful consideration, however they are beyond the • fly no closer than 50m from any persons, buildings or
scope of this work and we do not discuss countermeasures vehicles that are not under the control of the operator
further — focusing solely on the mechanics of detection.
• stay below a 400ft flight ceiling
• stay within line-of-sight of the operator
II. BACKGROUND
The market for consumer drones is contested by many III. ADVERSARYMODEL
different manufacturers, but at time of writing it is dominated We consider an adversary that operates an unmodified,
by only a few companies, namely DJI Innovations (49% US commercially-available drone with the intent of invading the
market share), Parrot (19%), Protocol (6.3%), Yuneec (5.6%) privacyoftheirneighbours.Theattackertriestocapturevideo
and 3D Robotics (4%) [27]7. of the interior of a building that they would not be able to see
intootherwise,againstthewilloftheinhabitants.Theattacker
The majority of drones provide a live video stream back
isconsideredtobepurelyanopportunistactinginappropriately
to the operator; so-called “first-person view” (FPV). In all
with standard equipment; they are not capable of modifying
but the simplest of flights it is a great benefit to the pilot
the drone in any way.
to be able to see from the perspective of the drone itself.
The user can commonly connect to the drone with their The adversary does not have access to the premises and is
smartphone, tablet or a dedicated controller to receive the thus positioned some distance away from the target window.
video, and often record the footage in higher resolution as To carry out the attack, the adversary has to move the drone
well. Interoperability with existing user devices has played a towards the window until it is in line-of-sight (LOS) of the
great role in enhancing the appeal of these consumer UAVs windowandcloseenoughthattheycanobservetheinteriorof
and hence most drones use the common 2.4GHz or 5.8 GHz the building by using the drone’s onboard camera. However,
Wi-Fi bands for their video downlink. Some even use Wi- they cannot get arbitrarily close due to turbulent air patterns
Fi for the telemetry (control channel) of the drone. In these from the facia of the building making the drone harder
cases, the drone can be controlled completely by an app. to control and the increased risk of detection and physical
Otherwise, a separate, dedicated controller is needed and the interception by inhabitants of the building. The quality of the
Wi-Ficonnectionisonlyusedforthelive-viewvideo.TableII footage is determined not only by the distance, but also the
shows different models from different manufacturers and the cameraresolutionandthefield-of-view(FOV)thatthewindow
communicationtechnologyusedfortheirvideodownlink.With allows. The speed of the approach is limited only by the
the exception of newer DJI drones, which use a proprietary drone’s capabilities.
technology named “Lightbridge”, Wi-Fi is at least optional in
allcases,ifnottheonlywaytoreceivevideoduringflight.As We identify three phases of the attack:
such we consider Wi-Fi as the drone communication system a)Approach: The drone is launched and approaches
throughout this work. the window until it is close enough for surveillance. In doing
so it must establish line-of-sight (LOS).
Airspace regulations differ between jurisdictions in terms
of the requirements placed upon drone operators. Almost b)Surveillance: Whilehoveringinfrontofthewindow,
all mandate that minimum separation distances are observed thedronerecordsvideofootageoftheinterior.Themovement
between the drone and any surrounding persons or property. of the drone in this phase is kept minimal in order to increase
In the United Kingdom, the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) the quality of the recorded footage.
7BasedondataprovidedbytheNPDGroup/RetailTrackingService c) Escape: Aftersuccessfullysurveillingtheinteriorof
8www.dji.com thehouse,thedronemovesawayfromthewindowandreturns
9www.parrot.com to the launch site.
10www.protocolrchelicopter.com
11www.yuneec.com While the attacker cannot alter the fundamental operation
123dr.com oftheirdrone,theycanvarytheflightpatternandspeedofthe
3Pre-processing
Flow
separation Statisticaltests Attackanalysis
Movement Attackphase
Throughput/ test determination Presence,
ds Packet-rate Attackphase,
γ filtering pF rr oe pe a- gsp aa tic oe n Proximity Proximity
alert
test
d
l
Fig. 2: Flow diagram of the detection algorithm.
V. DETECTION
Detection proceeds in three broad phases. The pre-
processing phase prepares the stream of received packets for
analysis. Then statistical tests are applied to establish whether
Inside Outside
individualtransmittersaremovingandoperatinginfreespace.
Fig. 1: The attacker launches the drone at launch distance d If the statistical tests pass then the attack analysis phase
l
and flies it to surveillance distance d to carry out the attack. determines the attack phase that is in progress and whether
s
The detector is installed in the window. The FOV γ of the thedronehasreachedcloseproximity.Thestepsaredescribed
window limits the area that is in LOS of the detector. below and shown in Figure 2.
A. Pre-processing
Thefirststeptowardsdetectionistheseparationofdifferent
droneinanattempttoavoiddetection.Forexample,theymay
data flows. Given the assumption that the drone is unmodified
try to approach as quickly as possible, as slowly as possible;
and that communication makes use of the IEEE 802.11 Wi-Fi
attempt to mimic hobbyist flight or stay out of sight from the
standard, flows are separated by MAC address. The provision
window for as long as they can. The attacker is limited only
of a continuous, live video stream from the drone to the con-
by the bounds of the drone’s manoeuvrability.
troller, necessitates a consistent, high bandwidth utilisation on
the communication channel13. The detection process excludes
flows that do not display this characteristic.
IV. SYSTEMMODEL
B. Statistical tests
We model the system as follows; visualised in Figure 1.
As the adversary does not have access to the premises of An airborne drone operates largely in free space, and must
the defender, there is a minimum launch distance d between establish LOS to the window (and thus the detector) in order
l
them and the target window. The adversary moves the drone to conduct a privacy invasion attack. As such the transmission
towardsthewindowwithanyspeeduptoamaximumofv , environment is uncluttered and the received signal strength
max
representing an upper bound on the speed of contemporary (RSS) can be expected to be dominated by the direct-path
drones. As the drone progresses towards the window, the component.Weneglectmultipatheffectsduetonearbyhouses
separation reduces to a surveillance distance d , at which the and the ground as the drone has this strong, short-range LOS
s
privacy invasion can take place. As mentioned in Section III, connection.SeeFigure3toseehowthepathlosschangesover
the attacker must balance the risks to their equipment and time for an attack with a straight approach and constant speed
successful attack against the quality of the captured footage, under the free-space propagation assumption.
and adopt a value of d such that they do so. The attacker
s The system applies statistical tests to a flow to establish
must also establish LOS with the target window; the limits
whether it is likely to represent a drone or not. The tests are
upon this are the FOV of the window, taken as γ.
based upon a comparison of the standard deviation of RSS
over short and long rolling time windows.
A small Wi-Fi receiver is mounted in the window. The
receiver is configured to capture traffic in monitor mode, Given the high packet rate exhibited by a live-streaming
periodically switching channels to cover the entire band. drone, in a sufficiently short period the drone does not move
enough for the change in RSS due to movement to be distinct
The received traffic is separated into flows, filtered and
from noise. For a non-moving LOS transmitter in a static
analysed to determine first whether an individual flow repre-
environment, changes in signal strength are largely due to
sentsalive-streamingdroneandthen,ifso,whetherthedrone
measurement noise and cross-traffic interference. Hence, we
is conducting a privacy invasion attack. The system maintains
expect a standard deviation that is close to that of the general
averages for the received signal strength (RSS) variance (in
noise level in such a timeframe. This noise threshold σ repre-
the form of standard deviation) of each flow, over rolling time
sentsthestandarddeviationofthenoisethereceiverissubject
windows of various sizes. It also monitors the baseline RSS
variance of packets from a known, static transmitter (such as 13Forexample,aParrotBebopdronecreates400packets/s,forathroughput
the user’s accesspoint). of500KB/s,whenproviding720pvideoat30frames-per-second.
4-40
-50 Approach Surveillance Escape
-60
-70
0 5 10 15 20 25 Time (s)
)Bd(
LPSF
The unbiased sample standard deviation can be computed
with:
(cid:118)
(cid:117) N
(cid:117) 1 (cid:88)
s(N)=(cid:116)
N −1
x
j
−x¯
j=1
where x¯= 1 (cid:80)N x is the sample mean. N i=1 i
We then have to compute the maximal window size for
which the standard deviation is below the noise threshold σ:
w =max{w|s(w·r)<σ}
s
Then σ bounds the standard deviation of the random
variable FSPL within window w . s
Fig.3:SimulationoftheFreeSpacePathLossduringaprivacy We consider the signal strength as the sum of random
invasion attack with 5s surveillance. The speed of the drone variables FSPL for the free-space path loss and X for the
N
is 5m/s, the surveillance distance d is 1m. noise. Then the variance of the sum of these random variables
s
is given by [16]:
Var(FSPL+X )=Var(FSPL)+Var(X )
N N
to. It can be determined in an automatic calibration phase by +2Cov(FSPL,X )
N
measuring the baseline noise from a known transmitter in a
staticenvironment.Asanexample,theaccesspointoftheuser We know from above that Var(FSPL) < σ2 and
can be used to calibrate the system. Var(X )=σ2. Additionally, we know that FSPL and X
N N
are uncorrelated, as they are independent random variables.
Over a long time period, however, the RSS from a mov-
This means that Cov(FSPL,X )=0 and it follows that:
ing drone is mainly affected by that movement. So, whilst N
the standard deviation alone may not be enough to confirm Var(FSPL+X )<σ2+σ2+2·0=2σ2
N
LOS transmission[30], we can additionally use the long-
term changes that are detectable by having a higher standard Consequently, the short-term free-space propagation test
deviation than for immobile transmitters [17]. fails when the stand√ard deviation of the measured samples
during w surpasses 2σ.
s
In combination, a low short-term standard deviation to-
gether with a high long-term standard deviation suggests a Analogously, we compute the larger window size to detect
LOS transmitter that is moving in free-space. We expect movement by choosing an expected minimal velocity v and
other moving transmitters on the ground or indoors to have by looking at the first stretch after launching at distance d .
l
more short-term variation due to changing multipath effects. In this case, the free-space path loss for the N corresponding
Whereas immobile transmitters in a static environment are measurements is:
expected to have a stable long-term standard deviation, while (cid:18) (cid:19)
i−1
those in a dynamic environment are expected to experience x =20log d − ·v +20log (f)−27.55
i 10 l r 10
substantial short-term changes.
Thistime,wearelookingfortheminimalwindowsizefor
Inordertoapplybothtests,thesystemmustfirstdetermine which the sample deviation is above the threshold:
appropriate short and long window sizes. To find a window
size where the change in signal strength stays below the noise w l =min{w|s(w·r)>σ}
level, we consider the part of the approach with the maximal
Again, using the independence of FSPL and X it
possiblechange.Thischangeoccurswhenthedronetravelsthe N
follows that:
final stretch at maximal speed before it arrives at surveillance
distance d s14. Var(FSPL+X N)=Var(FSPL)+Var(X N)>2σ2
Weassumethatthedronetransmitswithpacketrater,and
Asaresult,themovementtestissuccessfulifthemeasured
d , v and transmission frequency f are given. At packet
s max s√amplesduringw
l
haveastandarddeviationthatishigherthan
rate r we receive N = w·r transmissions in a time window
2σ.
of length w. Then the free-space path loss of each of these N
measurements is given by [12]:
C. Attack analysis
(cid:18) (cid:19)
i
Allflowsconsideredtobedronesareexaminedtoestablish
x =20log d + ·v +20log (f)−27.55
i 10 s r max 10 whetherornottheyarebeingusedtomountaprivacyinvasion
attack. The approach behaviour relative to the receiver is
determined by monitoring the long-term RSS trend; whether
14This is unlikely to happen in reality, as it is too hard to control a UAV
it is increasing, stable or decreasing. A proximity test is
atthatspeedsoclosetothewindow.Nevertheless,ithelpstodeterminethe
largestchangethatisphysicallypossibleandcausedbymovementalone. then applied to drone flows that appear to be approaching or
5hovering, to determine whether the drone has reached d and Approach Description LOS
s Direct Dronefollowsshortestpathtowindow Constant
begun surveillance.
Zig-zag Dronefollowszig-zagpattern;resulting Constant
invariableeffectiveapproachspeed
The attack phase can be deduced by taking the difference Backandforth Droneapproaches,backtracks,thenpro- Constant
between the mean of the first and the second half of w : gresses again; resulting in an effective
l
approachspeedthatissometimesnega-
x¯ −x¯ .
[1,(cid:98)N(cid:99)] [(cid:100)N(cid:101),N] tive
2 2
NLOS DroneavoidsLOSuntilshortlybefore Emerges
The sign of ∆x then determines the current attack phase;
surveillancephase
if the drone is approaching, ∆x is larger than zero, whereas
TABLE III: Example approach flight patterns
values lower than zero indicate that it is escaping. If the sign
of ∆x is zero, the drone is not moving. However, this is not
sufficient to decide whether the surveillance phase has started.
Itcouldjustbehoveringatalargerdistancefromthewindow,
without being able to observe the interior. Therefore, we have
to take the proximity to the window into account. 6
Weassumethattheapproachhasbeendetectedpreviously.
Let w be the window size in which the detection happened
l
and let v be the corresponding drone speed. Then the drone 4
has arrivedat surveillancedistanced , if∆x as definedabove
s
is larger than or equal to the following threshold σ :
p
(cid:18) i (cid:19) 2
x =20log d + ·v +20log (f)−27.55
i 10 s r 10
N =w l·v, ∆x≥σ p 0
0 10 20 30 40 50
Time (s)
OnecanseeinFigure8thatthewindowhastocatchupto
detectthesurveillancephase.Therefore,itisimportantthatan
alarm is already raised if proximity to the window is detected
afteranapproachphase.Thisisespeciallytrue,iftheapproach
wasveryslowasw mightcoverthewholesurveillanceperiod
l
otherwise.
Detection range
Tocomputethetimeuntiloursystemcandetectanattacker,
we take w as computed above: t =w . l d l
Then the detection range d is: d = d − w · v. The
d d l l
detection range depends on d , whereas the movement speed
l
v has little effect on it, and only shows a slight variation due
to the sampling rate.
Aswedonotknowtheactualspeedoftheattackingdrone
in advance, we have to compute a range of different window
sizes in parallel to guarantee a timely detection.
Approach patterns
Thecasestudiedabovecorrespondstoadirectapproachto
thewindow.AsnotedinSectionIII,theattackercanvarytheir
approach in an attempt to avoid detection. We consider a set
of example flight patterns; detailed in Table III and visualised
in Figure 4. Whilst these patterns are not exhaustive, they
demonstrate some extremes of the behaviour of an attacker.
The first three patterns have in common that the attacker is in
LOSofthewindowformostoftheattack;themaindifference
betweenthesethreepatternsistheeffectivespeedofthedrone
towards the window. The fourth pattern, the NLOS approach,
ensuresthatthedroneisonlyinLOSofthewindowforashort
periodoftime.Byapproachingfromthesides,aboveorbelow
likethis,theattackercangiveanydetectionapproach,whether
human or machine, less opportunity to detect the drone prior
to surveillance beginning.
)Bd(
LPSF
Legend
v
veff
Fig. 5: Simulation of a zig-zag approach with two different
choices of movement test window w . One is optimised for
l
the actual speed, the other one for the effective velocity. The
latter allows a faster detection.
In contrast to the direct approach, flying towards the
window using a zig-zag approach results in a lower effective
velocity towards the window, which in turn affects the choice
of appropriate w for the movement test. We simulated the
l
standard deviation for a zig-zag approach with two different
sliding windows; one for the actual speed v and another for
the effective velocity v . In Figure 5, one can see that
eff
the detection with a window size that is too short for the
effective velocity causes a delayed detection. Additionally,
the shorter window size captures the zig-zag motion of the
approach, whereas these erratic changes get smoothed out by
the larger window size of v . A similar effect is caused
eff
by a back-and-forth approach. The choice of w for the free-
s
space propagation test, on the other hand, is unaffected by the
approach pattern.
IfmostoftheapproachisdoneoutofLOSofthereceiver,
our assumptions about free-space propagation do not hold for
the larger part of the approach. Therefore, the part of the
approach that can be used for detection with our method gets
reducedsignificantly.Thisdistancedependsonthesurveillance
distance d and the FOV γ of the window. But the detection
s
mightnotalwaysbepossible.DependingontheFOVγ,noise
thresholdσ andsurveillancedistanced ,theapproachinLOS
s
can be too short to result in a notable change of the signal
strength. Refer to Figure 6 to see how the detectability of a
NLOS approach depends on γ and d .
s
6d d d
l l l
d
l
ds
γ
Outside
ds
Outside
ds
Outside
ds
Outside
Inside Inside Inside Inside
(a) Straight approach (b) Zig-zag approach (c) Back-and-forth approach (d)NLOSapproach,withFOVγ
Fig. 4: Various example approach patterns
8
6
4
2
100 125 150
FOV γ (°)
)m(ddegnar
noitceteD
Algorithm 1: Detection algorithm
Data: Data flow of one transmitter
Result: Attack phase S
begin
Legend
ds=1m, σ=2dB S ←−∅
ds=1m, σ=2.5dB for Increasing √w
l
until v
max
do
√ ds=2m, σ=2.5dB
if s(w ) < 2σ and s(w ) > 2σ) then
s l
if phase(w )>0 then
l
S ←−Approach
if proximity(w ) then
l
S ←−Surveillance
reset(w );
l
else if phase(w )>0 then
l
Fig. 6: Detection ranges for the NLOS approach. If the S ←−Escape
detection range d is smaller than surveillance distance d ,
d s
the detection will fail.
D. Detection algorithm
Inordertodetectdrones,wecomputetheslidingwindows
for the standard deviation of the signal strength using w and 9 Approach Surveillance Escape
s phase phase phase
increasing values of w . We proceed like this until we find a
l
value for which the standard deviation is below the threshold
within w s but breaks the threshold for w l. 6
Wethenusew todeterminetheattackphasebycomputing
l
∆x. For values greater than zero the drone is approaching. If
3
∆xadditionallyexceedsσ ,thenthedronehasreachedd and
p s
an alarm is raised. The rolling windows should be reset after
a proximity alert to make sure that the surveillance phase is
properly detected. The surveillance alarm lasts until the start 0
0 10 20 30
of the escape phase is detected. Time (s)
Pseudo-code for the detection algorithm can be found in
Algorithm 1, supporting the overall flow diagram in Figure 2.
See Figure 7 for the movement and free-space propagation
tests of the detection algorithm. This figure shows the rolling
standard deviation for a moving transmitter and a receiver
that is exposed to Gaussian noise. The attack phase tracking
and proximity alert for the same simulation are pictured in
Figure 8.
)Bd(
noitaived
dradnatS
Legend
wl=1s
wl=5s
ws=0.0725s
Fig. 7: Detection algorithm for a simulation with v = 7m/s,
d =50m and Gaussian noise with σ =2dB. It computes the l
standard deviation for the free-space propagation test during
w and several window sizes w in parallel for the movement s l
test. The black horizontal line is the noise threshold. It is first
broken by w =5s, making this is preferred window size. l
710
0
Approach Surveillance Escape
-10
0 10 20 30 Time (s)
)Bd(
xΔ
receiver, executing iPerf 2 with the same parameters as in
the drone experiment before. As expected, Figure 9 shows
that a transmitter in a static environment does not breach the
threshold, whereas the same transmitter violates the threshold
even for the shorter window of the free-space propagation
test. Such a transmitter is therefore not expected to be falsely
detected by our system.
Inanadditionalexperiment,wegathereddataofadifferent
type of moving transmitter in the form of a Raspberry Pi
being carried around. We captured transmissions both from
moving indoors and outside in front of the window. In both
cases,wemovedwithin10mofthereceiver.Theresultsofthis
Fig. 8: Attack phase and proximity detection for a simulation
experiment can be seen in Figure 10. Indoors, there is a high
with v = 7m/s, d = 50m, Gaussian noise with σ = 2dB and
l short-term standard deviation due to multipath effects. Even
σ =10. The black horizontal line is the proximity threshold.
p in the case of the movement outside an increased standard
We used w =5s as determined in Figure 7.
l deviation of the longer window is accompanied with higher
values breaching the threshold for the shorter window as well.
VI. EXPERIMENTALDESIGN
To demonstrate construction of our detection system using
COTS hardware, we made use of a number of Raspberry Pi
Model A15 units as receivers. As this model lacks on-board
Wi-Fi hardware, a Wi-Pi USB Wi-Fi adaptor was employed
to receive packets. The Raspberry Pis ran the dumpcap utility
16 to capture Wi-Fi traffic, with the Wi-Pi adaptors in monitor
mode to allow traffic capture without having to associate to
any network.
A. Preliminary experiments
We conducted a preliminary experiment to investigate our
assumptionsaboutthesignalpropertiesofaflyingdrone,using
a 3D Robotics X8+ drone. This drone was not equipped with
a camera and thus enabled us to fly it in more-populated
environmentswithoutbreachingCAAregulations.Instead,the
(a) Standard deviation of the signal strength in a static
drone carried a Raspberry Pi that communicated with a laptop
environment.
using the iPerf 217 benchmark tool at a bandwidth consistent
with live video (4 MB/s, 400 packets/s). Calibration for the
noise threshold was performed using background traffic from
other Wi-Fi transmitters in the area.
Over two short approaches (in distance and time), the
expected results appeared; with the standard deviation staying
above the threshold in the longer window during the approach
and below the threshold in the shorter window. However,
the receiver was configured to hop between the eleven 2.4
GHz Wi-Fi channels, resulting in a measured packet rate for
the drone signal of only between 50 and 250 packets per
second. As a result we refrained from using channel hopping
in the remainder of this work, noting that using a number of
network interfaces in parallel would alleviate the problem at
only minimally-increased cost.
(b) Standard deviation of the signal strength in a dynamic
We also captured comparative data from stationary trans-
environment.
mitters in LOS conditions in both static and dynamic envi-
ronments. Once again we used Raspberry Pis as sender and
Fig. 9: Results of the experiment with a static transmitter in
15www.raspberrypi.org LOS of the receiver.
16PartoftheWiresharknetworkprotocolanalyser(www.wireshark.org)
17https://iperf.fr/
8(a) Outside view (b) Inside view
Fig. 11: Deployment of the receivers
(a) Standard deviation of the signal strength indoors. Twoverypopulardroneconsumerdronemodelswereused
tomountoursimulatedprivacyattacks.Theprimarycandidate
was a DJI Phantom 3 Standard, with the experiments being
repeated using a Parrot Bebop unit for comparison. The two
drone models are pictured in Figure 12. Unfortunately, some
of the experiments were cut short due to time restrictions and
the English weather; especially those from the second series
using the Parrot Bebop.
(b) Standard deviation of the signal strength outdoors.
Fig. 10: Results of the experiment with a moving transmitter
(a) DJI Phantom 3 Standard (b) Parrot Bebop
in LOS of the receiver.
Fig. 12: Drones used in the real-world experiments
B. Main drone experiments
We performed attack runs for each of the approaches
The real-world experiments took place at a secluded18
described in Section V; in each case using the first floor
domestic property in Devon, United Kingdom. The property
window with Raspberry Pi 1 as the privacy-invasion target.
was an old farmhouse with thick, stone walls that were
The NLOS approach was further split into approaches over
expected to attenuate Wi-Fi signals heavily. The property was
the roof and around the house to include both a descent
surroundedbyopenland,allowingavarietyofapproachflight
from above and reaching the window from the side. Every
paths.
approachintheserieswasperformedwiththreerunrepetitions.
Two Raspberry Pis were installed in windows at the back The launch distance was between 55m and 65m for the LOS
sideofthehouse;oneinafirst-floorbedroomandtheotheron approaches.FortheNLOSapproachesthelaunchdistancewas
thegroundfloor,inakitchen.Figure11showsthedeployment muchshorterataround30mastheystartedfromthefrontside
locations and one receiver in situ. The Raspberry Pis were of the house, with the operator moving to keep the drone in
connected to a controlling laptop via a Powerline network to viewduringtheapproach.Norunexceededatopspeedof7m/s
avoid introducing cross-traffic on the wireless channel. For (approx. 25kph/15mph), as it is hard to control the drone at
calibration, we used the beacons of an accesspoint that was high speeds close to a building. The GPS flight data for each
locatedinthesameroomastheground-floorreceivertogather series were recorded by the Phantom. Some example traces
enough calibration packets in a timeframe of thirty seconds. are shown in Google Earth19 plots in Figure 13. One can see
The signal strength measurements of these packets were then that the GPS data became less precise close the window, as
usedtocomputethestandarddeviationσofthebaselinenoise, the drone no longer had a clear view of the GPS satellites.
as described in Section V-B. Specific details of the Phantom experiment series, as extract
from the GPS flight data, can be found in Table IV.
18To comply with CAA regulations as detailed in Section II and avoid
disruptiontoothers.Thenearestpropertythatwasnotunderourcontrolwas
over350maway. 19earth.google.com
9(a) Straight approach (b) Zig-zag approach (c) NLOS approach over the roof (d) NLOS approach around the
house
Fig. 13: Different flight patterns during the approach
Pattern Run Distance(m) Max.Speed(m/s) Parameter Value Description
Straight 1 57 5.94 ds 1m We stayed within one to two meters
2 61 6.24 of the window during the surveillance
3 61 6.35 phase
Zig-zag 1 61 6.36 dl 50m AlltheLOSapproachesstartedfurther
2 62 6.66 thanthat
3 62 4.72 ws 0.1s Corresponding to a maximum velocity
Back-and-forth 1 62 4.24 of10m/s
2 61 4.43 wl 5s,10s,15s,30s Correspondingtothefollowingrespec-
3 61 5.38 tive minimal velocities: 5.075, 2.535,
NLOSover 1 28 2.78 1.69,0.845m/s
theroof 2 30 3.92 σ 1.75 Derived according to Sec√tion V-B;
3 30 3.62 hencethenoisethresholdis 2·1.75
NLOSaround 1 35 2.48 σp 10 The threshold for the proximity alert;
thehouse 2 31 3.48 derivedfromds
3 33 4.06
TABLE V: System parameter selections used in Evaluation
TABLE IV: DJI Phantom 3 experiment series.
VII. EVALUATION
surprisingly fast after only one and half a meters travelled
In this section, evaluate how well the metrics from Sec-
since takeoff. From the model in Section V we had expected
tion V are able to detect a drone using the data from our
the drone to be on target height and approach speed when we
experiments. We use only the data from the Phantom for
receivedourfirstpacket,howeverthedetectionhappenedmuch
the analysis of the movement test, attack-phase tracking and
earlierthanexpectedbecausethetakeoffandthevaryingspeed
proximity detection. The results for these are similar for both
due to acceleration increase the measured standard deviation.
Phantom and Bebop and, as described in Section VI, we have
In comparison, if we were to start detection during the second
a more complete set of runs for the Phantom. However, we
acceleration period starting at (3) at a distance of 51m, the
realised when analysing the data that we only captured the
drone would be detected 37m from the window. This is closer
control channel of the Phantom. Therefore, the packet rate is
to the expected value of 25.15m for this distance but still
quitelowat40packetspersecond.Whilethisisnotaproblem
earlier than predicted. This can be attributed to the drone not
for the large-window tests, it only leaves us with about four
travellingasclosetoaconstantspeedasexpected.Thevelocity
packets within w . Hence, we used the data from the Bebop
s decreased at (4), as we had to slow down to pilot the drone
series to examine the free-space propagation test.
safely closer to the house; at distance 6m. The larger window
Inourevaluationweselectedsystemparametersasgivenin size of 15s compensates for decelerating during the approach
Table V. The minimal detection range using these parameters and throughout this period the standard deviation stays above
was 24.5m. thethreshold(recallthatoursystemalwayschoosesthelowest
window size that is above the threshold and uses it for phase
tracking and proximity detection). The surveillance period
A. Straight approach
started at (5) where the drone stayed as still as possible in
Examining movement-tracking first, in Figure 14a three front of the window. After the rolling windows catch up,
windows of rolling standard deviation are displayed for the the standard deviation drops markedly and stays below the
first run of the Straight Phantom set. The drone launched at threshold almost the entire time until the escape phase starts
(1) at a distance of 57m from the window; the first increase at(6).However,itdoesstillbreachthethresholdoccasionally.
is due to the initial ascent, but is not enough to break the In practice there are still many corrections necessary to keep
threshold. There is a short spike in the 5s window before the the drone in place in front of the window. As the drone is so
actual detection happens which only lasts for a few samples. close to the receiver during the surveillance phase, even small
At (2) the drone started accelerating towards the window. Due movements have a notable effect on the RSS and can breach
to its slow speed at the time, the 10s window is the first to thedetectionthreshold.Finally,thedronelandedat(7)leading
detectit,albeitbyaverysmallmargin.Thedetectionhappens to another short spike as it reached the ground.
1010.0
(1) (2)(3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
1 2
Time (min)
)mBd(
noitaived
dradnatS
Legend
10s
15s
5s
(a) Standard deviation of the signal strength. The black horizontal
line is the movement detection threshold.
(1) (2)(3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
10
0
-10
1 2
Time (min)
)mBd(
xΔ
Fig. 15: Standard deviation for a straight approach with the
Parrot Bebop. The black horizontal line is the free-space
propagationdetectionthresholdwhichshouldnotbeexceeded
within w =0.1s. The vertical lines indicate: (1) Surveillance
s
and (2) Escape. More details can be found in the text.
thresholdandthereforeanotherwindowsizeisfavouredoverit
for phase tracking and the proximity metric — so no spurious
proximity warning is produced. The second peak, just after
Legend
(4), results in a genuine proximity alert for the 10s window.
10s
The distance from the window at the time was 4.2m, which is
15s
5s greaterthand s.InFigure14a,theblackverticallineshowsthe
momentwhenvaluesinthe5swindowfallbelowthedetection
threshold. Consequently, the 10s window is used to check for
proximity and the alarm is triggered.
As mentioned before, we evaluate the free-space prop-
agation test that uses w using the Bebop series due to
s
the higher observed packet rate. Figure 15 shows the RSS
standarddeviationforthefirststraightBeboprun.Thestandard
(b) Attack phases. The drone is approaching when the values are deviationofthe0.1swindowstaysmostlybelowthethreshold
positive and escaping for negative values. The black horizontal line throughout the approach; only very few samples violate it
is the proximity threshold. initially.Whenthedroneisclosetothewallofthebuilding,the
standard deviation increases even within w , hence breaking
s
Fig. 14: Straight approach with the DJI Phantom 3. The the threshold more often. At this time, however, we can
black vertical line shows when the 5s window undercuts the already be quite sure that it is a drone. The peaks during the
movement threshold. The dotted vertical lines indicate: (1) surveillance period are caused by movement in front of the
Takeoff, (5) Surveillance, (6) Escape and (7) Landing. More window;wehad tomakemorecorrectionsto accountfordrift
details can be found in the text. with the Bebop, than with the heavier Phantom.
B. Zig-zag approach
Forthezig-zagapproachwewillfirstlookatwindowsizes
Forattack-phasetracking,wecomparethefirstandsecond
derived from the maximal and effective approach velocity.
halves of w , shown in Figure 14b. Both the 10s and 15s
l For the first zig-zag run the maximal approach velocity was
windows stay positive for the entire approach. There is more
v =5.12m/s.Usingv wecomputew =6.15s.On
variation in the 5s window as it captures slowing down better max max l,max
the other hand, the effective velocity for the whole approach
than the longer window sizes. All the windows have values
was only v = 1.04m/s and thus w = 30.225s. In
close to zero during surveillance after catching up and are eff l,eff
Figure16aonecanseethatthesmallerwindowsizedetectsthe
negative during the escape phase, as per our expectations.
dronefasteratadistanceof59.5mwhereasthelargerwindow
A proximity alert is triggered when the phase tracking size only detects the drone 53m away from the receiver.
breaches threshold σ . In Figure 14b, one can see that with However, w = 6.15s captures the erratic changes caused by
p l
the larger window size of 15s, readings break the threshold thezig-zagmovement,whereasw =30.225ssmoothsoutthe
l
earlyduetothecumulativeeffectofpositivereadingsoverthe flight pattern and shows the whole approach. The decrease in
preceding period. However, at this moment the 15s window is standarddeviationinthesecondpartoftheapproachiscaused
not the smallest for which the standard deviation is above the by a general decrease in approach speed.
1110
(1) (2) (3) (4)
5
0
4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0
Time (min)
)mBd(
noitaived
dradnatS
Legend
30.225s
6.15s
(a) Parameters derived from the model using v and v
max eff
8
(1) (2) (3) (4)
6
4
2
0
4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0
Time (min)
)mBd(
noitaived
dradnatS
In comparison, the higher window size w =43.65s is
l,eff
able to capture the complete approach as a whole. However,
italsocoverstheentiresurveillanceperiod,againhighlighting
the need for the proximity metric as a stop-and-alarm condi-
tion. If we use the system parameters as before, we can see in
Figure 17b that the 30s window is sufficiently large.
9 (1) (2) (3) (4)
6
3
0
1 2 3
Time (min)
Legend
10s
5s
(b) System parameters
Fig. 16: Standard deviation for a zig-zag approach with the
DJI Phantom 3. The black horizontal line is the movement
detectionthreshold.Theverticallinesindicate:(1)Takeoff,(2)
Surveillance, (3) Escape and (4) Landing. More details can be
found in the text.
We can see the same effect if we use our system with the
parameters from the beginning of the section, cf. Figure 16b.
Lower window sizes than the derived values are possible as
w =10salreadycapturesthecompleteapproach.Thisisagain
l
likely to be due to an increased standard deviation because of
the launch and acceleration periods.
C. Back-and-forth approach
For the back-and-forth approach, we proceed in a similar
fashion as for the zig-zag approach. We compute w for
l
the maximal speed v = 4.24s, and the effective veloc-
max
ity v = 0.72s. Similarly to before, Figure 17a shows
eff
that the former is affected by the flight pattern whereas the
latter captures the complete approach. The shorter window
w = 7.425s shows larger peaks followed by smaller
l,max
peaks.Thelargerpeakscorrespondtoforward,thelowerpeaks
to backward motion.
)mBd(
noitaived
dradnatS
Legend
43.65s
7.425s
(a) Parameters derived from the model using v and v
max eff
10.0
(1) (2) (3) (4)
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
1 2 3
Time (min)
)mBd(
noitaived
dradnatS
Legend
30s
5s
(b) System parameters
Fig.17:Standarddeviationforaback-and-forthapproachwith
theDJIPhantom3.Theblackhorizontallineisthemovement
detectionthreshold.Theverticallinesindicate:(1)Takeoff,(2)
Surveillance, (3) Escape and (4) Landing. More details can be
found in the text.
Additionally, we can study the approach phase tracking in
Figure 18. We can see that if we only rely on the shorter
window, the system oscillates between approach and escape
phases, whereas the longer window size makes it possible for
us to detect the approach as a larger trend.
D. NLOS approach over the roof
The first NLOS run with an approach over the roof is
pictured in Figure 19a. The drone takes off at launch distance
28m on the other side of the house. Its forward acceleration
starts at (2) and it reaches maximal altitude at (3). At (4) the
12(1) (2) (3) (4)
10
0
-10
1 2 3
Time (min)
)mBd(
xΔ
15
10 (1)(2)(3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Legend
30s
5s
5
0
1 2 3
Time (min)
Fig. 18: Attack phases for a back-and-forth approach with the
DJI Phantom 3. The black horizontal line is the proximity
detectionthreshold.Thedroneisapproachingwhenthevalues
are positive and escaping for negative values. The vertical
lines indicate: (1) Takeoff, (2) Surveillance, (3) Escape and
(4) Landing. More details can be found in the text.
descent begins, on the receiver side of the house. The first
big peak for window size 15s happens as the drone is flying
over the receiver, above the roof. The next peak occurs as it is
descendingintoLOS,withanotheronefollowingwhenitgets
closer to the window up to d . The surveillance period starts
s
at (5), before the drone escapes over the roof again at (6).
We had to fly at slow speeds close to the house for careful
manoeuvring which explains why higher values are needed
to capture the whole approach compared to the straight LOS
series.
In Figure 19b, the standard deviation within w is dis-
s
played. One can see that the standard deviation is low in spite
of the missing LOS connection. The roof of the house seems
to affect the signal only by attenuation and does not lead to
significant interference due to multipath effects.
E. NLOS approach around the house
A run of the other NLOS approach variant, around the
house, is shown in Figure 20. Similarly to the approach over
the house, we see peaks as the drone crosses the receiver,
gets into LOS and approaches the window. For both NLOS
approachesthereisadistinctincreaseinthestandarddeviation
when the drone comes into LOS. Once it is in LOS the
behaviour is similar to the LOS approaches.
F. Detection ranges
Toexaminedetectionrangeweletseveralrollingwindows
(5, 10, 15, 30 seconds) run in parallel and chose the first
window size to detect the drone as well as the first that stayed
above the threshold for the whole approach phase.
Table VI shows the resulting movement detection ranges.
In all of the LOS runs, our system detected the drones far
earlierthantheminimaldetectionrangeof24.5m,asmeasured
from GPS traces using Google Earth. The detection distances
of the second and third back-and-forth runs are lower than the
)mBd(
noitaived
dradnatS
Legend
15s
30s
5s
(a)MovementtestwithDJIPhantom3.Theverticallinesindicate:(1)
Takeoff, (5) Surveillance, (6) Escape and (7) Landing. More details
can be found in the text.
(b)Free-spacepropagationtestwithParrotBebop.Theverticallines
indicate: (1) Surveillance and (2) Escape. More details can be found
in the text.
Fig. 19: Standard deviation for a NLOS approach over the
roof. The black horizontal line is the noise threshold.
Pattern Run Detectionrange(m)
Straight 1 55.5
2 55
3 53.77
Zig-zag 1 60
2 59.5
3 60.13
Back-and-forth 1 60.22
2 51.47
3 48.65
TABLE VI: Detection ranges of the DJI Phantom 3 LOS
experiment series.
first as they began with a longer and faster forward movement
and thus still resembled a straight approach at the time of
detection. That the drone flew the approaches with varying
velocityactuallyincreasedthedetectionrange,asdidthemore
time-consuming flight patterns.
1310
(1) (2) (3) (4)
5
0
6 7 8
Time (min)
)mBd(
noitaived
dradnatS
B. Observations
Ourexperimentalexperiencesreinforcedtheexpectationof
a reliance by the pilot on the drone’s FPV video stream. At
close range it is possible (and sometimes preferable) to watch
the drone directly when flying, however the benefits of doing
Legend this quickly disappear as the drone operates further away and
10s
the pilot is less able to reason about its position relative to
5s
other objects purely by eye. In this case, and certainly where
there is no direct line of sight at all, the attacker depends on
the streamed video to pilot successfully. Even in the minimal
case, conducting the privacy attack itself, the operator needs
immediate feedback to ensure that the drone obtains a good
viewoftheinteriorofthebuilding—itprovedeasytocapture
detailed footage of a window-frame by mistake. An attacker
could,iftheirhardwarepermitted,disablethevideostreamfor
Fig. 20: Standard deviation for a NLOS approach around the
a period in order to avoid providing a suitable communication
housewiththeDJIPhantom3.Theblackhorizontallineisthe
stream for the detection system. However, doing so near the
movement detection threshold. The vertical lines indicate: (1)
targetorwhenattemptingsurveillance,wouldlikelyjeopardise
Takeoff, (2) Surveillance, (3) Escape and (4) Landing. More
the attack. Indeed, a short surveillance distance is crucial
details can be found in the text.
in mounting a successful attack; at large distances a high-
resolution camera or telescopic lens is required to capture a
detailedimageofthebuildinginteriorandeventhenthevisible
area is heavily constrained by the window. Our observations
The proximity alert was triggered within 5m of the target
suggest that values of d at one or two metres are realistic.
s
window in every experiment run. Unfortunately, due to the
roof occluding GPS satellites, the data from the traces is too If the drone flies close to the ground for the entirety of the
imprecise to determine the exact distance in each case. approach, ground reflections are strong multipath components
and violate the free-space propagation assumption; making
the drone indistinguishable from an attacker moving on the
ground themselves. In practice however, we expect that the
VIII. DISCUSSION
attacker has to overcome access restrictions and hence must
A. Results fly higher for at least some part of the approach, making the
drone detectable again.
The most notable discovery throughout our experiments
was that detection happened earlier than our simulations had
predicted.Inlargepartthisissimplyattributabletoourmodel
IX. FUTUREWORK
beingveryconservativeandreal-worldattacksnotdemonstrat- Our experiments were conducted with the drone and con-
ingsuchextremebehaviour.Ever-changingconditionsandop- troller as the only communicating parties on a Wi-Fi channel.
eratorinaccuracyleadsrealdroneflighttohavefarmorespeed In order to understand better the expected performance of
variance than the constant-speed approaches we had assumed. the system in an urban environment, it would be helpful
No two consecutive flights were identical, even with the same to examine the effect of cross-traffic on detection. As the
intended approach pattern. Close to the target, in the latter cross-traffic packet-rate increases, the number of successfully-
stages of an approach and during surveillance, the movement measured RSS samples in a given period is reduced and we
is even more erratic as the drone must navigate a tighter wouldexpectthistodegradethedetectionspeedandaccuracy,
environment and counteract drift from wind conditions and although the precise behaviour remains unclear.
sidewash turbulence in order to establish and maintain a close
hover. The reliance purely upon the operator’s precise control As this detection approach uses only RSS measurements,
is intensified as GPS stabilisation systems are hampered by a the equipment used in this work is but one of a great number
reduced view of the sky when near a building. The detection ofpossibilities.ThemajorityofWi-FihardwareprovidesRSS
system parameters must be carefully selected to ensure that data and many drivers make this information available. Purely
the Escape phase is not indicated prematurely. software-basedimplementationsarefeasibleformanufacturers
andoftenforend-usersaswell.Forexample,anAndroiduser-
Takeoff is the first movement a drone makes, but commu- space driver exists for some Wi-Fi adapters20, allowing the
nication begins before this point. This prior communication is systemtobeimplementedasanapptoturnauser’smobilede-
beneficial to our detection as the received messages establish vice into a drone detector. The low modification requirements
an initial measurement in each window, such that the takeoff of this approach greatly benefit its applicability, especially if
itselfisenoughtobringthestandarddeviationabovethedetec- they mean it can be incorporated into commonplace devices
tionthresholdinmanycases.Suchearlydetectiongivesample instead of requiring additional hardware. This does raise the
timefortheusertobewarnedofaprivacy-invasionattackand questionhowever,ofhowwellthesystemwouldperformwith
takeprotectiveaction.Italsopresentsanopportunitytosimply anunordered,potentiallydynamic,deployment.Understanding
inform a user of nearby drone activity that is not, or has not
yet developed into, an attempt at privacy invasion. 20Forexample,theAlfaOneNIC,withanRTL8187chipset
14the factors involved would greatly inform discussions of the [9] Kristina Davis. Two plead guilty in border drug smuggling by drone.
widespread applicability of the system. Los Angeles Times, 2015. Accessed: 29.06.2016. URL: http://www.
latimes.com/local/california/la-me-drone-drugs-20150813-story.html.
[10] Drone Detector. Compare detection systems, 2016.
X. CONCLUSION
Accessed: 10.07.2016. URL: http://www.dronedetector.com/
compare-detection-systems/.
In this work, we developed a method to detect privacy-
[11] T Eshel. Mobile radar optimized to detect UAVs, precision guided
invasion attacks by drones based on their communication with
weapons. DefenseUpdate,2013.
a controller. Our approach uses analysis of RSS variance in
[12] Vijay Garg. Wireless communications & networking. Morgan Kauf-
the drone’s transmissions to check for free-space propagation
mann,2010.
and examine its movement. We developed a further method
[13] SaitMuratGiray. Anatomyofunmannedaerialvehiclehijackingwith
to monitor if the drone is approaching the detector or moving signal spoofing. In Recent Advances in Space Technologies (RAST),
away from it and another to detect proximity to a receiver. 20136thInternationalConferenceon,pages795–800.IEEE,2013.
Combined use of these metrics enables us to track the phase [14] NPD Group. Year-over-year drone revenue soars, ac-
of an attack. We conducted real world experiments using cording to NPD, 2016. Accessed: 29.06.2016. URL:
two types of commercially-available drones that communicate https://www.npd.com/wps/portal/npd/us/news/press-releases/2016/
year-over-year-drone-revenue-soars-according-to-npd/.
over Wi-Fi, with various example flight patterns and target
[15] Samy Kamkar. Skyjack, 2013. Accessed: 10.07.2016. URL: http:
windows. For all series, the approaching drone was detected
//samy.pl/skyjack/.
earlyonduringtheattackandthesystemsuccessfullytriggered
[16] NitisMukhopadhyay. Probabilityandstatisticalinference. CRCPress,
an alarm when the drone got close to the window. We were
2000.
able to detect a drone approaching in LOS of the detection
[17] KavithaMuthukrishnan,BerendJanvanderZwaag,andPaulHavinga.
system at a minimal distance of 48 meters. Even for a NLOS Inferring motion and location using WLAN RSSI. In Mobile Entity
approach, detection was fast and actually happened before the LocalizationandTrackinginGPS-lessEnvironnments,pages163–182.
drone came into LOS. Springer,2009.
[18] Matthew Peacock and Michael N Johnstone. Towards detection and
In summary, our system is able to detect drones flying controlofcivilianunmannedaerialvehicles. 2013.
nearby and can alert when a drone is in proximity of a [19] Artem Rozantsev, Vincent Lepetit, and Pascal Fua. Flying objects
window. For even the largest of physical windows, the de- detection from a single moving camera. In 2015 IEEE Conference
tection happens at a great enough range that an attacker will onComputerVisionandPatternRecognition(CVPR).IEEE,2015.
have had no chance to conduct detailed surveillance before [20] Stephan Sand, Armin Dammann, and Christian Mensing. Positioning
inWirelessCommunicationsSystems. JohnWiley&Sons,2014.
the alarm is raised. Our implementation used only cheap and
[21] Michael S. Schmidt. Secret service arrests man after drone
easily-obtained hardware. Moreover, the system is built upon
flies near White House. New York Times, 2015. Ac-
measurements that are available in the vast majority of Wi-Fi
cessed: 29.06.2016. URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/15/us/
capable systems, opening up widespread deployment options. white-house-drone-secret-service.html.
[22] Michael S. Schmidt and Michael D. Shear. A drone, too small for
ACKNOWLEDGMENT radar to detect, rattles the White House. New York Times, 2015.
Accessed: 29.06.2016. URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/27/us/
Simon Birnbach and Richard Baker are supported by the white-house-drone.html.
EPSRC. [23] Linzi Sheldon. Woman terrified by drone outside her window. KIRO
7, 2014. Accessed: 29.06.2016. URL: http://www.kiro7.com/news/
woman-terrified-drone-outside-her-window/81721261.
REFERENCES
[24] DanielPShepard,JahshanABhatti,ToddEHumphreys,andAaronA
Fansler.EvaluationofsmartgridandcivilianUAVvulnerabilitytoGPS
[1] Guard From Above. Intercepting hostile drones, 2016. Accessed:
spoofingattacks. InProceedingsoftheIONGNSSMeeting,volume3,
10.07.2016. URL:http://guardfromabove.com/.
2012.
[2] Federal Aviation Agency. FAA releases 2016 to 2036 Aerospace
[25] YunmokSon,HocheolShin,DongkwanKim,YoungseokPark,Juhwan
Forecast,2016. Accessed:29.06.2016. URL:http://www.faa.gov/news/
Noh,KibumChoi,JungwooChoi,andYongdaeKim. Rockingdrones
updates/?newsId=85227.
with intentional sound noise on gyroscopic sensors. In 24th USENIX
[3] FederalAviationAgency.FAAreleasesdroneregistrationlocationdata, SecuritySymposium(USENIXSecurity15),pages881–896,2015.
2016. Accessed:29.06.2016. URL:https://www.faa.gov/news/updates/
[26] MichiganTech. Roboticfalconry,2016. Accessed:10.07.2016. URL:
?newsId=85548.
http://me.sites.mtu.edu/rastgaar/home/news/.
[4] CivilAviationAuthority. TheAirNavigationOrder2016AndRegula-
[27] Robotics Trends. Drone registration no drag as sales soar, 2016.
tions(CAP393),2016. Accessed:25.08.2016. URL:http://publicapps.
Accessed: 29.06.2016. URL: http://www.roboticstrends.com/article/
caa.co.uk/docs/33/CAP%20393 AUG2016.pdf.
drone registration no drag as sales soar.
[5] Sanjay K Boddhu, Matt McCartney, Oliver Ceccopieri, and Robert L
[28] Juan R Vasquez, Kyle M Tarplee, Ellen E Case, Anne M Zelnio, and
Williams. A collaborative smartphone sensing platform for detecting
BrianDRigling. Multisensor3Dtrackingforcountersmallunmanned
and tracking hostile drones. In SPIE Defense, Security, and Sensing.
air vehicles (CSUAV). In SPIE Defense and Security Symposium.
InternationalSocietyforOpticsandPhotonics,2013.
InternationalSocietyforOpticsandPhotonics,2008.
[6] Joe¨l Busset, Florian Perrodin, Peter Wellig, Beat Ott, Kurt Heutschi,
[29] WDRB. Hillview man arrested for shooting down
Torben Ru¨hl, and Thomas Nussbaumer. Detection and tracking of
drone; cites right to privacy, 2015. Accessed:
drones using advanced acoustic cameras. In SPIE Security+ Defence.
29.06.2016. URL: http://www.wdrb.com/story/29650818/
InternationalSocietyforOpticsandPhotonics,2015.
hillview-man-arrested-for-shooting-down-drone-cites-right-to-privacy.
[7] EllenECase,AnneMZelnio,andBrianDRigling. Low-costacoustic
[30] Zhuoling Xiao, Hongkai Wen, Andrew Markham, Niki Trigoni, Phil
array for small UAV detection and tracking. In 2008 IEEE National
Blunsom, and Jeff Frolik. Identification and mitigation of non-line-
AerospaceandElectronicsConference.IEEE,2008.
of-sight conditions using received signal strength. In 2013 IEEE 9th
[8] British Broadcasting Corporation. Big rise in drone jail smuggling InternationalConferenceonWirelessandMobileComputing,Network-
incidents, 2016. Accessed: 29.06.2016. URL: http://www.bbc.co.uk/ ingandCommunications(WiMob),pages667–674.IEEE,2013.
news/uk-35641453.
15