KEH-Gait: Towards a Mobile Healthcare User
Authentication System by Kinetic Energy Harvesting
Weitao Xu1,3, Guohao Lan2,3, Qi Lin2,3, Sara Khalifa2,3, Neil Bergmann1,3, Mahbub Hassan2,3, Wen Hu2,3
1School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, University of Queensland, Australia
Email: {w.xu3}@uq.edu.au {n.bergmann}@itee.uq.edu.au
2School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Australia
Email: {glan,sarak,mahbub,wenh}@cse.unsw.edu.au {qi.lin}@student.unsw.edu.au
3Data61 CSIRO, Australia
Abstract—Accelerometer-based gait recognition for mobile However, such wearable systems are vulnerable to imper-
healthcare systems has became an attractive research topic in sonation attacks in which an adversary can easily distribute
the past years. However, a major bottleneck of such system is his device to other users so that data collected from these
it requires continuous sampling of accelerometer, which reduces users can be claimed to be his own. In this way, the attacker
battery life of wearable sensors. In this paper, we present KEH-
can claim potential healthcare profits that are allocated to
Gait, which advocates use of output voltage signal from kinetic
people with certain illnesses even though he may not have
energyharvester(KEH)asthesourceforgaitrecognition.KEH-
any illnesses [4]. For instance, a policy holder may obtain
Gait is motivated by the prospect of significant power saving by
a fraudulent insurance discount from a healthcare insurance
not having to sample the accelerometer at all. Indeed, our mea-
surements show that, compared to conventional accelerometer- companybyusingotherpeople’shealthdata.Anotherexample
based gait detection, KEH-Gait can reduce energy consumption is that in a mobile healthcare system for disease propagation
by 78.15%. The feasibility of KEH-Gait is based on the fact control[5],anattackercanobtainadditionalvaccineallocation
that human gait has distinctive movement patterns for different by launching user impersonation attacks and thus compromise
individuals, which is expected to leave distinctive patterns for the regular operations of such systems.
KEH as well. We evaluate the performance of KEH-Gait using
twodifferenttypesofKEHhardwareonadatasetof20subjects. To mitigate the risk of malicious attacks, most wearable
Our experiments demonstrate that, although KEH-Gait yields devices rely on explicit manual entry of a secret PIN number.
slightly lower accuracy than accelerometer-based gait detection However, due to the small screens of wearable devices and
when single step is used, the accuracy problem can be overcome frequentunlockingrequests,itisinconvenientforuserstoenter
by the proposed Multi-Step Sparse Representation Classification the keys manually. Furthermore, this method is not applicable
(MSSRC). We discuss the advantages and limitations of our when an adversary colludes with other users to spoof the
approach in detail and give practical insights to the use of KEH
healthcare company.
in a real-world environment.
Gait recognition using wearable sensors, such as ac-
celerometers, has emerged as one of the most promising
I. INTRODUCTION solutions for user authentication. It offers several advantages
over other biometrics especially when applied in wearables.
With rapid advancements in embedded technology, wear-
Forinstance,althoughfingerprintandfacehavebeenproposed
able devices and Implantable Medical Devices (IMDs) have
foruserauthenticationonsmartphones,fingerprintreadersand
become an integral part of our everyday life. It is predicted
cameras are not always available on wearable devices such
that by 2025, the market for personal wearable devices will
as pacemakers and smart watches. In comparison, because
reach70billiondollar.Themajordeploymentsofthosedevices
walking is a daily activity, the main advantages of gait are its
areexpectedtobeinhealthmonitoringandmedicalassistance
availabilityandspontaneity.Furthermore,gaitisnon-intrusive,
domains[1],[2].Somepopularwearabledevices,suchasFitbit
and can be measured without subject intervention or knowl-
andAppleWatch,arealreadymonitoringandstoringamassof
edge[6].Thismotivatesususinggaitasabiometric.Extensive
sensitivehealthdataabouttheuser.Theprivateinformationof
previous studies have already demonstrated its feasibility in
users can be further explored to provide a variety of emerging
user authentication [7], [8], [9], but they have also shown that
applications in the healthcare area. For example, the collected
continuous accelerometer sampling drains the battery quickly.
sensory data can be explored for the understanding of user’s
High power consumption of accelerometer sampling, which
physical and mental health states [3].
is typically in the order of a few milliwatts, also makes it
challengingtoadoptgait-baseduserauthenticationinresource-
Permission to freely reproduce all or part of this paper for noncommercial constrained wearables. Although power consumption may be
purposes is granted provided that copies bear this notice and the full citation not a big issue for wearables with large batteries such as
on the first page. Reproduction for commercial purposes is strictly prohibited smartphone, other wearables like IMDs suffer from short
without the prior written consent of the Internet Society, the first-named author
battery life because IMDs are long-lived devices and battery
(for reproduction of an entire paper only), and the author’s employer if the
replacement requires surgical intervention [10].
paper was prepared within the scope of employment.
NDSS ’17, 26 February - 1 March 2017, San Diego, CA, USA
A vision for wearable devices is to be battery-free (self-
Copyright 2017 Internet Society, ISBN 1-891562-46-0
http://dx.doi.org/10.14722/ndss.2017.23023 powered). A current trend in battery-free devices is to in-vestigate kinetic energy harvesting (KEH) solutions to power gait detection by employing a novel classification
the wearable devices [11], [12], [13], [14]. However, one method,calledMulti-StepSparseRepresentationClas-
fundamentalprobleminKEHisthattheamountofpowerthat sification (MSSRC), which efficiently fuses informa-
canbepracticallyharvestedfromhumanmotionsisinsufficient tion from multiple steps.
to meet the power requirement of accelerometer for accurate
• Finally, using measurements, we demonstrate that
activity recognition [15]. As reported in [11], the amount
currently available microprocessors can read KEH
of power that can be harvested from human motion is only
voltage within 33 µs, which is two orders of mag-
in the order of tens to hundreds of microwatts. This 2-3
nitude faster than what it takes to wakeup, interro-
orders of magnitude gap between power consumption and
gate and read acceleration values from typical 3-axis
power harvesting is the biggest obstacle for realising gait-
accelerometers. This means that with microproces-
based authentication in batteryless wearables. Although the
sor duty cycling, KEH-Gait promises major energy
power consumption of sensors has been largely reduced in
savings over conventional accelerometer-based gait
the last years thanks to the Ultra-Low-Power electronics [16],
detection.
we believe in the near future energy harvesting will be used
to augment or substitute batteries. For example, AMPY [17]
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Sec II
has released the world’s first wearable motion-charger which
provides technical background on energy harvesting devices.
can transform the kinetic energy from user’s motion into
Sec III introduces trust models and attacker models of gait-
battery power. SOLEPOWER [18] produces smart boots that
basedauthenticationsystem.SecIVpresentsthesystemarchi-
use user’s steps to power embedded lights, sensors, and GPS.
tecture of KEH-Gait. Prototyping of KEH wearables and gait
KINERGIZER has developed a small piezoelectric generator
data collection are described in Sec V. We present evaluation
withtheabilitytoharvestenergyatlowfrequenciestoproduce
results in Sec VI, and analyze power consumption in Sec VII.
as much as 200µW of power [19].
We have a discussion of our work in Sec VIII and introduce
Motivatedbythisprospect,weproposegaitrecognitionby related work in Sec IX before concluding the paper in Sec X.
simply observing the output voltages of KEH. The feasibility
oftheproposedideaisbasedontheobservationthatifhumans II. BACKGROUND
have unique walking patterns, then the corresponding patterns
of harvested power from KEH should be unique too. The pro-
posed system offers several advantages. The major advantage
of KEH-based gait recognition is the potential for significant
power savings arising from not sampling accelerometer at
all. On the other hand, the output voltage can be used to
charge the battery, thus further extending battery life. Finally,
(a) (b)
as energy harvester will be integrated in wearable devices in
thenearfuture,theoutputvoltagecanbenaturallyutilizedfor
Fig.1: Examplesof twoKEH devices:(a) PEH,and (b)EEH.
authentication purpose without introducing extra sensors. This
makes it a promising solution for light-weight authentication Vibration-based energy harvesting has received growing
for wearable devices. The main challenge of implementing attention over the last decade. The research motivation in
suchasystemisachievinghighrecognitionaccuracybyusing this field is due to the reduced power requirement of small
a1-axisvoltagesignalratherthan3-axisaccelerometersignals. electronic components, such as the wireless sensor networks
We address this issue by proposing a novel sparse fusion used in passive and active monitoring applications. The three
method which exploits the information from multiple steps. basic vibration-to-electric energy conversion mechanisms are
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that the piezoelectric [20], electromagnetic [21], [22] and electro-
proposes and experimentally validates the feasibility of gait static [23].
recognition using KEH. The main contributions of this paper
As electrostatic usually needs external voltage source, we
are as follows:
built two proof-of-concept prototypes based on piezoelectric
• We propose a novel gait-based user authentication and electromagnetic respectively. Therefore, we briefly de-
system for mobile healthcare system, called KEH- scribe piezoelectric energy harvester (PEH) and electromag-
Gait, which uses only KEH voltage as the source neticenergyharvester(EEH)tomakethepaperself-contained.
signal to achieve user authentication. Thepiezoelectriceffectconvertsmechanicalstrainintoelectric
current or voltage. This strain can come from many different
• We build two different KEHprototypes, one based on
sources, such as human motions and low-frequency seismic
piezoelectric energy harvester (PEH) and the other on
vibrations. Figure 1(a) shows a basic design of PEH. Piezo-
electromagnetic energy harvester (EEH). Using these
electric vibrational energy harvesters are usually inertial mass
KEH devices, we evaluate gait recognition accuracy
based devices, where a cantilever with a piezoelectric outer
of KEH-Gait over 20 subjects. Our results show that,
layerisexcitedintoresonancebyavibrationsourceattheroot
withconventionalclassificationtechniques,whichop-
of the cantilever. The inertial mass is located on a vibrating
erate over single step, KEH-Gait achieves approxi-
host structure and the dynamic strain induced in the piezo-
mately6%loweraccuracycomparedtoaccelerometer-
electric layer results in an alternating voltage output. Unlike
based gait recognition.
piezoelectric,thebasicprincipleofelectromagneticgenerators
• WedemonstratethatauthenticationaccuracyofKEH- are based on Faraday’s law of electromagnetic induction. As
Gait can be increased to that of accelerometer-based shown in Figure 1(b), the voltage, or electromotive force is
2generated when an electric conductor is moved through a
GGaaiitt rreeccooggnniittiioonn
magnetic field. Because of the small size and light weight,
Accelerometer Data
PEH is promising for hand-held and wearable devices such as
AAcccceelleerroommeetteerr
wristwatches (e.g., the SEIKO Kinetic watch1), on the other
hand, due to the weight of magnet, EEH usually has a larger RRaaddiioo
weight and may not be embedded in the wearable devices,
but can be used as an external mobile power source (e.g., the
(a)
AMPY Move mobile charger).
Output Voltage Data
III. TRUSTANDATTACKMODELS GGaaiitt rreeccooggnniittiioonn
EEnneerrggyy
HHaarrvveesstteerr
RRaaddiioo
User Wearable Data center
device (b)
Spoof attacker
fail Fig. 3: Gait recognition systems: (a) conventional
Upload
gait data Authentication accelerometer-based gait recognition and (b) KEH-Gait.
pass
Genuine user For some applications, continuous authentication may be
unnecessary.However,one-timevalidationoftheusersidentity
is becoming insufficient for modern devices and applications
that process sensitive data. A simple example is the mobile
Fig.2:Theoverviewofatypicalhealthcaremonitoringsystem.
phone will lock the screen and demand users to enter their
PIN every few minutes. Such situations might benefit from a
We envision the use of KEH-Gait primarily in resource-
seamless authentication approach that incorporates continuous
constrainedhealthcaremonitoringwearabledevicestoauthen-
verification of the user’s identity. KEH-Gait leverages gait
ticate the identity of the user to prevent spoof attack. KEH-
which is a common daily activity to provide unobtrusive and
Gaitaddressestheissueofshortbatterylifebyusinganenergy
continuous authentication without user intervention. There are
harvestertoreplaceanaccelerometer.Inthenearfuture,energy
also many commercial products that provide biometrics-based
harvesters can even be integrated in the hardware system to
continuous authentication systems such as BehavioSec3 and
achieve battery-free wearable devices. Figure 2 illustrates the
Eyefluence4.
workflow of a typical healthcare monitoring system. In such a
system, each user is given a unique user ID and a monitoring A. Trust Model
application which runs on a wearable device that can collect
Inthispaper,weassumethedatacollectedbysensorsbuilt
private sensor data and transmit them to the data centre of
inthewearabledevicesaretrustworthy.Also,oursystemtrusts
a healthcare company. Before transmission, the device first
the communication channel between the wearable device and
collects gait data and transmits them to the sever. The server
the healthcare company’s server. We discuss the feasibility of
will then perform authentication to verify the user’s identity
our assumption as follows.
by using the gait data. If the user passes authentication, the
further private data like blood pressure or heart rate are then Tamper-resistant Sensor. An attack can physically ac-
transmitted to the server. While if the user verification fails, cesses to the sensor or chipset and manipulate the recorded
i.e., the user spoofing attack is detected, the sensor data data.Tomakesurethedevicehasnotbeenmodified,ahealth-
collected from this user’s device will not be reported to the care company can apply tamper-resistant techniques [24]. As
server.Intheserver,sensordatawillbeanalysedandprocessed mentionedin[25],ARMTrustZoneextensioncanalsobeused
bythehealthcarecompanytoderiveuser’sphysicalandmental to ensure the integrity of the sensors [26].
conditions. For instance, the measurements of heartbeats and
Trusted Transmission. A man-in-the-middle(MITM) at-
blood pressure can be used to predict user’s psychological
tack may occur when the device is communicating with the
conditions. A wide range of applications can also be enabled
server. Therefore, the device and server should establish a
by such mobile healthcare systems and some examples are:
secure communication channel. To address this attack, the
• User’sphysicalbehaviorsareoftenreflectionofphys- healthcarecompanycaninstalladigitalcertificateinthewear-
ical and mental health and can be used by healthcare able device and the device will perform SSL authentication
companiestofacilitateearlypredictionoffuturehealth when communicating with the server.
problems like depression [3]. B. Attack Model
• Health food companies can make advertisement by Theaforementionedmobilehealthcaresystemisvulnerable
cooperating with healthcare related applications such to user spoofing attacks. For instance, an adversary can dis-
as“IDOMOVE”2,e.g.,providingdiscountcouponsfor tributehisdevicetoanotherperson,anduploadthedataofthat
users who walk more than 1hr a day. person aiming to obtain healthcare benefits. Besides, multiple
1KINETIC:http://www.seiko-cleanenergy.com/watches/kinetic-1.html. 3https://www.behaviosec.com/
2IDOMOVE:https://www.idomove.com/ 4http://eyefluence.com/
30 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
Samples
)2s/m(
noitareleccA
2
Subject 1 X-axis
1.5 Y-axis
Z-axis
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
Samples
(a) Accelerationsignalofsubject1
)2s/m(
noitareleccA
2.5 Subject 2 X-axis
Y-axis
2 Z-axis
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
(b) Accelerationsignalofsubject2
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
Samples
)V(
egatloV
0.4
Subject 1
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
Samples
(c) Outputvoltageofsubject1fromaPEHdevice
)V(
egatloV
1.5
Subject 2
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
(d) Outputvoltageofsubject2fromaPEHdevice
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
Samples
)V(
egatloV
0.5
Subject 1
0
-0.5
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
Samples
(e) Outputvoltageofsubject1fromanEEHdevice
)V(
egatloV
1.5
Subject 2
1
0.5
0
-0.5
(f) Outputvoltageofsubject1fromanEEHdevice
Fig. 4: A comparison of the output voltage signal from different devices: (a) and (b) exhibit the acceleration signal from 3-axis
accelerometer when two different subjects are walking; (c) and (d) plot the output voltage signal from a PEH device; (e) and (f)
show the output voltage signal from an EEH device.
users may collude to launch user spoofing attacks to fool problems such as high blood pressure, it will manipulate the
the mobile healthcare system. Therefore, the adversary model data and transmit the forged data to the server. This type
considered in this paper focuses on impersonation attacks. We of attack can be addressed by the scheme in [25]. Further
assume the presence of two types of impersonation attacks: potential threats include deriving the walking patterns by
a passive adversary and an active adversary. The passive studying a video of the target’s gait through computer vision
adversary tries to spoof the healthcare system by using his techniques. We believe this is a potential vulnerability of
own walking patterns. The active spoofing attacker knows the unknown severity and leave it as future work.
authentication scheme and will try his best to imitate the
IV. SYSTEMARCHITECTUREOFKEH-GAIT
walking pattern of the genuine user to spoof the healthcare
system. In this section, we discuss the proposed KEH-Gait frame-
work in details. First, we compare KEH-Gait with traditional
The main goal of our system is to detect spoofing attacks.
accelerometerbasedgaitrecognitionsystem.Figure3(a)shows
Infact,therearemanyotherpossibleattackstosuchhealthcare
the pipeline of a traditional accelerometer-based gait recog-
system. We discuss these possible attacks and corresponding
nition system, in which the accelerometer data are used to
solutions. The first type of attacks we consider is replay
train a classifier for gait recognition. In contrast, as shown in
attacks. In replay attacks, an adversary first records a mea-
Figure3(b),KEH-Gaitexploitstheoutputvoltagesignalofthe
surement trace from another person. Then he replays the data
kinetic energy harvester for gait recognition directly. By not
tracetothemonitoringdevicetofoolthehealthcaremonitoring
using the accelerometer, KEH-Gait can save the energy that
system.Thisattackcanbeeasilydetectedasdiscussedin[25].
is used to sample the accelerometer. The saved energy can
Although a MITM attack during communication between the
be further used to power other components in the wearable
deviceandservercanbeeasilyprevented,thereisanothertype
device, such as the classifier and radio. The radio can be used
of MIMT in which an adversary may build a MITM monitor
to transmit the personal data to a base station or a server.
which bridges the user’s skin and a wearable device. For
example,onceitdetectsaresponsemessageindicatinghealthy Figure 4 compares the output voltage signal from two
4SSiiggnnaall PPrree--pprroocceessssiinngg ((SSeecc IIVV..BB)) Classification (Sec IV.D )
VV
EEnneerrggyy Ropty1=RoptAx1
HHaarrvveesstteerr SSppaarrssee
GGaaiitt CCyyccllee yy11
RReepprreesseennttaattiioonn
SSppaarrssee VVeeccttoorr xx11
Output Voltage .. .. ..
SSeeGG ggmmaaiitt ee nnCC ttyy aacc ttllee iioonn IInntteerrppoollaattiioonn .. .. .. SSppaarrssee FFuussiioonn RReessiidduuaall
Roptyk=RoptAxk
SSppaarrssee
GGaaiitt CCyyccllee yykk
RReepprreesseennttaattiioonn
SSppaarrssee VVeeccttoorr xxkk
IIddeennttiittyy
Offline Training A Ropt
(Sec IV.C )
TTrraaiinniinngg GGaaiitt CCyyccllee UUnnuussuuaall SStteepp PPrroojjeeccttiioonn
IInntteerrppoollaattiioonn DDiiccttiioonnaarryy
DDaattaa SSeeggmmeennttaattiioonn DDeelleettiioonn OOppttiimmiizzaattiioonn
Fig. 5: System flowchart of KEH-Gait
types of energy harvester (EH) generated by two subjects B. Signal Pre-processing
when they are walking. These figures provide a clear visual
1)Gait Cycle Segmentation: In order to recognize a gait
confirmation that the voltage signal from the energy harvester
signal,itisessentialthatweseparatethetimeseriesofwalking
contains personalized patterns generated by the subjects. This
periodsintosegments,suchthateachsegmentcontainsacom-
observation is promising as our goal is to recognize different
plete gait cycle. The gait cycle can be obtained by combining
subjects based on the output voltage signal of the EH when
two successive step cycles together as technically the gait
they are walking.
cycle is across a stride (two steps). As mentioned in [28],
typical step frequencies are around 1-2Hz, we apply a band-
A. System Overview pass Butterworth filter [29] on the sampled data to eliminate
out-bandinterference.Theloweranduppercutofffrequencyis
As shown in Figure 5, the whole procedure of KEH- setas1Hzand2Hzseparately(filterorderis4).Afterfiltering,
Gait consists of three parts: offline dictionary training, pre- the step cycles are separated by finding peaks associated with
processing of input signals, and classification. the heel strike as shown in Figure 6. Thereafter, the gait cycle
isobtainedbycombiningtwoconsecutivestepcyclestogether.
During the offline dictionary training phase, gait cycles
are first segmented from time series voltage signal and then After gait cycle extraction, the output voltage data are
interpolated into the same length. All detected cycles are segmented into short gait cycles based on the peak detection.
passed to unusual cycles deletion to remove outliers of gait Figure 7 presents the distribution of cycle duration (i.e. time
cycles. The obtained gait cycles are used to form the training lengthofstride)for20healthysubjectswalkingattheirnormal
dictionary A. After obtaining A, we apply the projection speed. We can see that most of the gait cycle ranges between
optimizationalgorithmin[27]toobtainaoptimizedprojection 0.8-1.3s(80-130samplesat100Hzsamplingrate).Thisresults
matrix R . Then the reduced training dictionary A˜=R A in turn can be used to omit unusual gait cycles and exclude
opt opt
is used in the classifier as described in Section II. the cycles not produced by walking, i.e., the cycles which last
less than 0.8s and exceed 1.3s are dropped.
Aftertheacquisition ofthetestsignal,we againapplygait
cycle segmentation and interpolation to obtain the gait cycles 2)Linear Interpolation: Detected cycles are normalized
from the test signal. The same optimized projection matrix to equal length by linear interpolation because SRC requires
(as used for training) is used to reduce the dimension of the vectors of equal length as input. As mentioned above, normal
test signal and provide the measurement vector y˜ = R y , gaitdurationliesbetween80and130samples,weapplylinear
i opt i
i=1,2,··· ,k, and k is the number of obtained gait cycles. interpolation on the samples to ensure that they achieve the
same length of 130 samples.
Now both the training dictionary A˜ and the measurements
y˜ are passed to the classifier. The (cid:96) classifier first finds the
i 1 C. Offline Training
sparse coefficient vector x . Then the vectors of different gait
i
cyclesarefusedbasedonanovelsparsefusion model,andthe Thetrainingdataarealsopassedtogaitcyclesegmentation
fused sparse vector is used to calculate the residuals. Finally, andlinearinterpolationtoobtaingaitcycleswithsamelength.
the identity is obtained by finding the minimal residual. In addition, we delete unusual cycles and optimize projection
matrix to further improve recognition accuracy.
In the following sections, we detail the design of signal
pre-processing,offlinedictionarytraining,andclassificationin 1)Deletion of Unusual Cycles: Unusual cycles caused by
turn. occasional abnormalities like temporary walking pauses or
50 1 2 3 4 5 6
Time(s)
)V(egatloV
2
1.5 Gait cycle F Ri alt wer e dd a td aata
Step cycle
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2
Fig. 6: The time series of harvested energy: raw data (blue
dash line), filtered data (green solid line).
0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1 1.05 1.1 1.15 1.2 1.25 1.3 Gait Cycle Duration(s)
ytilibaborP
we have acquired a set of M gait cycles from the test
signal. Following the single test vector approach described
in Section II, we can obtain a set of estimated coefficients
vectors Xˆ = {xˆ ,xˆ ,...,xˆ } by solving the (cid:96) optimization
1 2 M 1
problem for each gait cycle. Theoretically, a precise sparse
representation will only contain the non-zero entries at the
locations related to the specific class. However, noise exists in
theempiricalestimations.Therefore,theestimatedcoefficients
vector of the m-th test gait cycle can be expressed as:
xˆ =x+(cid:15) (1)
m m
where x is the theoretical sparse representation of the test
0.14 vector and (cid:15) is used to account for noise. The test vector
m
0.12
couldbemisclassifiedduetolowSignaltoNoiseRatio(SNR).
0.1
ToenhancetheSNRoftheclassificationsystem,weproposea
0.08
newsparserepresentationmodelbyexploitingtheinformation
0.06
frommultiplegaitcycles.Thenewsparserepresentationmodel
0.04
can be expressed as:
0.02
0 M (cid:88)
xˆ = α xˆ (2)
sum m m
Fig. 7: Distribution of cycle duration
m=1
where α is the weight assigned to xˆ based on the Sparsity
m m
turning contains much noise that will deteriorate the recog- ConcentrationIndex (SCI) defined in [31]:
nition accuracy. Apart from deleting unusual cycles using K·max (cid:107)δ (xˆ )(cid:107) /(cid:107)xˆ (cid:107) −1
cycle durations, the detected cycles are also passed to a SCI(xˆ m)= j j Km −11 m 1 ∈[0,1] (3)
function which further deletes unusual cycles. This function
the SCI measures how concentrated the coefficients are in the
usesDynamicTimeWarping(DTW)distancescorestoremove
dictionary. SCI(xˆ ) = 1, if the test vector can be strictly
outliersfromasetofcycles.Specifically,wefirstcomputethe m
linearlyrepresentedusingtrainingvectorsfromonlyoneclass;
DTW distance between the detected cycle and typical cycle.
and SCI(xˆ ) = 0, if the coefficients are spread evenly over
Thereafter, we delete unusual cycles by a simple threshold m
all classes. The weight of xˆ is obtained by normalizing the
method,i.e.,iftheDTWdistanceofdetectedcycleandtypical m
SCIs among the obtained M gait cycles:
cycle is higher than a predefined value (12 in the proposed
system), the detected cycle will be dropped. The typical cycle M
(cid:88)
is the one which is assumed to represent the subject’s gait α =SCI(xˆ )/ SCI(xˆ ) (4)
m m n
signal. This is obtained by computing the the average of all
n=1
cycles in the training data.
With the knowledge of xˆ , the compressed residual of
2)Projection Optimization: After unusual cycles removal, sum
each class is computed as:
the remaining gait cycles obtained from training data are
used to form the final training dictionary A. Motivated by a r (y )=(cid:107)R y −R Aδ (xˆ )(cid:107) (5)
i sum opt sum opt i sum 2
recent work [27], we apply the projection matrix optimization
M
method proposed in [27] to reduce the dimensionality of SRC (cid:80)
where y = α y is the weighted summation of all
sum m m
whileretainingthehighclassificationaccuracy.Theprojection
m=1
matrix R is learned from dictionary A based on Tabu thetestvectors.Followingthesameapproachin[31],[27],the
opt
search [30]. We refer the reader to [30] for more details. final classification result is obtained by finding the minimal
residual.
D. MSSRC To identify whether the walker is the genuine user or im-
poster,weadaptthesameprinciplein[27]byusingconfidence
SRC aims to solve the classification problem of one test
level defined as:
vector, however, the evaluation results in Section VI-C show
that the recognition accuracy of using one gait cycle can (cid:32) K (cid:33) K
1 (cid:88) 1 (cid:88)
achieve 86% (PEH dataset) and 75% (EEH dataset) only. To confidence= r − min r / r (6)
overcome this limitation, we propose a novel sparse fusion K i=1 i i=1,...,K i K i=1 i
model which fuses the sparse coefficients vectors from mul-
Theconfidencelevelisintherangeof[0,1]andtheverification
tiple consecutive gait cycles to further improve recognition
decision can be made by:
accuracy.
(cid:26)
≥C genuine user
The key assumption behind the proposed method is that confidence
<C imposter
gait cycles obtained from consecutive gait cycles tend to have
a high agreement on the sparse representations because each where C is a threshold we set empirically. An appropriate
of the gait cycles from the same person should be linearly threshold can be chosen by data-driven approach to make the
represented by the same class in the dictionary. Suppose recognition system robust to imposters.
6V. HARDWAREPLATFORMANDDATACOLLECTION Electromagnetic Coil Magnet
energy harvester
A. Proof-of-concept Prototype
collP ecE tH PEd Hata vol lo tag gg eer. siT go nat lh s.is Te hn ed, daw tae b lou gil gt ea
r
id na ct la udlo eg sg aer vt io
-
4.7cm
bration energy harvesting product from the MIDE` Technology
calledVolture,whichimplementsthetransducertoprovideAC
voltage as its output. Our hardware also includes a 3-axis ac-
celerometer to record the acceleration signals, simultaneously 0.8cm
Tmote Sky
with the voltage signal. An Arduino Uno has been used as a board
microcontroller device for sampling the data from the Volture.
A sampling rate of 100Hz has been used for data collection. Fig. 9: EEH data logger
The sampled data has been saved on an 8GB microSD card
whichhasbeenequippedtotheArduinousingmicroSDshield.
A nine volts battery has been used to power the Arduino. To
control the data collection, our data logger also includes two
switches, one is an on/off switch and the other to control the
start and stop of data logging. The Arduino measures voltage
between 0 and 5 volts and provides 10 bits of resolution
(a) Indoorexperiment (b) Outdoorexperiment
(i.e., 1024 different values). Therefore, we calculated the
corresponding output voltage from the measurements using
the following formula V = 5∗measurement. The hardware
1023
platform and the internal appearance of the data logger are
shown in Figure 8.
Power switch for on/off the device Power switch for the start/stop data recording
4cm
6cm
(c) HoldingPEHdevice (d) HoldingEEHdevice
Fig. 10: The illustration of data collection.
12.5 cm
(a)
B. Data Collection
Piezoelectric Energy Harvester
(VoltuPireez ovel2ec5twric) Energy HarMvesitrecr oSD Shield 8 G B B M iM rcoi Sr Dco CS arD d Card The dataset used to evaluate the performance of the pro-
posed system consists of 20 healthy subjects (14 males and
6 females)5. During the data collection phase, the participants
were asked to hold the data logger in their preferred hand and
walk at their normal speed (0.7-1.1m/s). The data collection
is performed in several environments (indoor and outdoor)
in order to capture the influence of different terrains. An
illustration of indoor environment and outdoor environment
Arduino Uno Microcontroller Volts Battery to power Arduino
is shown in Fig 10(a) and Fig 10(b). The terrain of the chosen
outdoor environment varies including plain, grass and asphalt.
Arduino Uno Microcontroller 9Volts Battery to power Arduino
Each volunteer participated in two data collection sessions
(b) that was separated by one week. During each session, the
participants were asked to hold the device (see Fig 10(c)
Fig. 8: PEH data logger: (a) the external appearance and (b) and Fig 10(d)) and walked along the specific route shown in
the internal details. Figure 10(a) and Figure 10(b) for approximately 5 minutes.
Based on the above description, the gait dataset is close to
a realistic environment as it includes the natural gait changes
EEH data logger. We also built an EEH data logger to
over time and different environments (indoor and outdoor).
collect voltage signals generated from an EEH device. The
In total, we have collected over 300 seconds of samples for
dataloggercontainsaharvestingcircuit,throughwhichenergy
eachsubjectfromtheEHdevicesaswellastheaccelerometer.
is generated by moving a magnet through an inductor. A
We collect two voltage datasets by using the PEH and EEH
Tmote sky board has been used as a microcontroller device
devices,respectively,andperformgaitcyclesegmentationand
for sampling the data from the inductor. A sampling rate of
unusual gait cycle deletion on both of the datasets, and finally
100Hzhasbeenusedfordatacollection.Thesampleddatahas
we extract 200 gait cycles from each subject for evaluation.
been saved in the 48K Flash of the MSP430 microcontroller.
TwoAAbatterieshasbeenusedtopowertheTmoteskyboard. 5Ethicalapprovalforcarryingoutthisexperimenthasbeengrantedbythe
We use a button to control the data collection. correspondingorganization(ApprovalNumberHC15304andHC15888)
71 10 20 30 40 50 100
Sampling rate (Hz)
)%(
ycaruccA
100 100
90
80
80
60 70
60
40 50
20 40 30
0 20 15% 25% 50% 75% 100%
Compression rate
(a)
)%(
ycaruccA
Accelerometer signal(100Hz)
Voltage signal-PEH signal(100Hz) Voltage signal-EEH signal(100Hz) Accelerometer signal(8Hz)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Number of gait cycles
(b)
)%(
ycaruccA
100
80
60
40 Accelerometer signal (100Hz) Voltage signal-PEH (100Hz)
20 Voltage signal-EEH (100Hz) Accelerometer signal (8Hz)
0
(c)
Fig. 11: (a) Recognition accuracy vs sampling rate. (b) recognition accuracy under different compression rate when k=1. (c)
recognition accuracy under different number of gait cycles when =75%.
VI. EVALUATION with equal size. Then, each fold is retained as the validation
datafortestingtheclassifier,andtheremaining9foldsareused
A. Goals, Metrics and Methodology
as training data. The cross-validation process is then repeated
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the pro- 10 times, with each of the 10 folds used exactly once as the
posed system based on the collected dataset. The goals of the testing data. In the evaluation, we let k denote the number
evaluation are threefold: 1) investigate the relation between of gait cycles fused to perform classification and σ denote
recognition accuracy and sampling rate of accelerometer data; thecompressionrate.Thecompressionratemeansthenumber
2) compare the recognition accuracy of KEH-Gait with that of projections/features over the dimension of original testing
of using accelerometer data; 3) compare the proposed clas- vector. We plot the results of the average values and 95%
sification method in KEH-Gait with several state-of-the-art confidence level of the recognition accuracy obtained from 10
classification algorithms. folds cross-validation.
In this paper, we focus on the following three evaluation
B. Recognition Accuracy v.s. Sampling Rate
metrics:
Inthefirstexperiment,weevaluatetheimpactofsampling
• Recognitionaccuracy:itrepresentsthepercentageof
rate on the gait recognition accuracy of acceleration data. The
correct classifications which is simply the number of
goalistoinvestigatetherelationbetweenrecognitionaccuracy
true classifications over the total number of tests.
and the consumed power of accelerometer, as the power
• Falsepositiverate(FPR):probabilitythattheauthen- consumption is directly related to the sampling rate. We use
tication system incorrectly accepts the access request MSSRCastheclassifierandcalculatetherecognitionaccuracy
by an imposter. at different sampling rates by subsampling the acceleration
data from 100Hz to 1Hz. As shown in Figure 11(a), the
• False negative rate (FNR): probability that the au- recognition accuracy increases with growing sampling rate.
thentication system incorrectly rejects the access re- This is intuitive as the more measurements are sampled, the
quests from the genuine users. moreinformationisavailable,andthus,enablingmoreaccurate
classification. However, the improvement diminishes after the
The recognition accuracy of KEH-Gait is obtained by
samplingrateisgreaterthan40Hz.Theresultsindicatethatto
using output voltage in one gait cycle as a test vector. For
achieve high recognition accuracy, a sampling rate of at least
fair comparison, we perform the same signal processing and
40Hz is required. In the rest of the evaluation, we limit our
classificationmethodonaccelerationdata.Theonlydifference
discussion on sampling at 40Hz.
isthetestvectorisobtainedbyconcatenatingaccelerationdata
along three axes in one gait cycle together. In the evaluation, AswewilldiscussinSectionVII-B1,thepowerconsump-
wecompareMSSRCwithSupportVectorMachine(SVM),K- tion of accelerometer-based system will increase significantly
NearestNeighbor(KNN),andNaiveBayes(NB).Theintuition withtherisingsamplingfrequency.Basedonourmeasurement
of we use SRC is that it has shown better performance than results, the accelerometer-based system consumes approxi-
traditional classification methods (e.g., SVM and KNN) in mately 300µW with 40Hz to achieve accurate recognition.
recognitiontasksofsensorareassuchasfacerecognition[27], However, this consumption requirement is far beyond the
[32] and voice recognition [33]. SRC is known to be robust to actual power generated by the energy harvester (neither PEH,
noise because of its use of (cid:96) optimization [27]. Thus, we use nor EEH). According to a recent theoretical study of energy
1
SRC in KEH-Gait and improve its performance by exploring harvesting from human activity [11], assuming 100% con-
the sparsity of testing vectors as discussed in Section IV-D. version efficiency, the power can be harvested from walking
The parameters in SVM, KNN and NB are well tuned to is only 155µW. Unfortunately, in practical, according to our
give highest accuracy. For KNN classifier we set the number measurement results, the average power produced from walk-
of nearest neighbors as 10. For SVM classifier, we choose ing is 19.17µW using EEH, and approximately 1µW using
linear kernel function, and the soft margin constant is set 10. PEHwhichisnottunedspecificallyforhumanactivityenergy
We choose normal Gaussian distribution for NB. For each harvesting.Inthiscase,duetothelimitedamountofpowerthat
classifier,weperform10-foldcross-validationonthecollected is available to power the system, its sampling frequency will
dataset.Specifically,werandomlysplitthedatasetinto10folds decrease below 40Hz. As a result, the recognition accuracy
8100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
15% 25% 50% 75% 100%
Compression rate
)%(
ycaruccA
100
90
80
70
60
KEH-Gait 50
Naive Bayes
SVM 40
KNN 30
20
1 2 3 4 5
Number of gait cycles
(a) PEHdatasetwithdifferentcompressionrate(k=1)
)%(
ycaruccA
KEH-Gait
Naive Bayes
SVM
KNN
(b) PEHdatasetwithdifferentk (σ=0.75)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
15% 25% 50% 75% 100%
Compression rate
)%(
ycaruccA
100
90
80
70
60
50 KEH-Gait
Naive Bayes 40
SVM
KNN 30
20
1 2 3 4 5
Number of gait cycles
(c) EEHdatasetwithdifferentcompressionrate(k=1)
)%(
ycaruccA
KEH-Gait
Naive Bayes
SVM
KNN
(d) EEHdatasetwithdifferentk (σ=0.75)
Fig. 12: Comparison with other classification methods on two datasets (sample rate 40Hz).
will dramatically decrease accordingly. The results highlight thisexperiment,wesetσ =75%astheaccuracyimprovement
the necessity of using kinetic voltage signal to achieve gait diminishes when the number of projections/features increased
recognition directly, instead of using the accelerometer signal. to 200 as shown in Figure 11(b). Then we calculate the
In the next subsection, we will show that the recognition recognition accuracy of KEH-Gait using accelerometer signal
accuracy of using kinetic voltage signal is comparable to that and voltage signal, while increasing k from 1 to 8. From the
of using accelerometer data. resultsinFigure11(c),wenoticethattherecognitionaccuracy
is improved significantly when more gait cycles are fused
C. KEH-Gait v.s. Accelerometer-based System together. The result is intuitive as more information can be
obtained to identify the subject by using more gait cycles. We
In this section, we investigate whether KEH-Gait can
also find that by using voltage signal of PEH, we can achieve
achieve comparable accuracy compared to accelerometer sig-
a comparable accuracy compared to using raw accelerometer
nal. In case of using accelerometer signal, we calculate the
signal when k = 8, and the recognition accuracy of EEH is
recognition accuracy at two different sampling rates: 1) raw
slightlylower(3%)thanusingrawaccelerometersignal.Inthe
sampling rate (100 Hz) of the data logger; and 2) the highest
real application, k can be tuned by the healthcare company to
achievable sampling rate of the accelerometer if it is powered
satisfy their own needs. For example, a larger k makes the
bytheenergyharvester.Fromourdataset,theenergyharvester
system more secure to the imposters while it sacrifices user
can generate 19.17 µW on average from walking. Thus,
experience because it will take more time to collect required
according to the handbook of MPU9250 which is used in our
steps.
prototypes, it can sample at most 8Hz if it is powered by the
energy harvester.
D. Comparison with Other Classification Methods
In this experiment, we set k = 1 and calculate the
recognition accuracy by varying compression rate σ from WenowevaluatewhetherMSSRCoutperformsotherstate-
15% to 100%, and the results are plotted in Figure 11(b). of-the-art classification algorithms. Specifically, we compare
We can see that the recognition accuracy of using voltage MSSRC with SVM, KNN, and NB. We perform comparison
signal is significantly higher than that of using accelerometer on two datasets separately.
atsamplingrateof8Hz.Thissuggeststhattheharvestedpower
PerformanceonPEHdataset.Wefollowthesameexper-
cannotsupporttheaccelerometertosampleatahighfrequency
imental procedure in Section VI-C to evaluate the recognition
which leads to low recognition accuracy; instead, using the
accuracy of different methods under different d (number of
voltage signal itself is able to achieve higher recognition
projections/features). From Figure 12(a), we find that KEH-
accuracy. However, the recognition accuracy of using voltage
Gait improves recognition accuracy by up to 7% compared to
signal is still approximately 6% (PEH) and 17% (EEH) below
the second best classification method (i.e., NB). We further
than that of using raw accelerometer signal when σ =100%.
evaluate the recognition accuracy of SVM, KNN and NB by
Wenowdemonstratethattherecognitionaccuracyofusing combining several gait cycles together. As KEH-Gait utilizes
harvested power signal can be improved significantly by the multiple gait cycles to find the final classification result, we
proposed MSSRC, and it reaches a comparable recognition applythemajorityvotingschemetoachieveafaircomparison.
accuracy compared to using the raw accelerometer signal. In Specifically, we first obtain the identity of each gait cycle by
91 2 3 4 5
Number of gait cycles
)%(
ycaruccA
100
90
80
70
60 Same day
Different day
50
1 2 3 4 5
Number of gait cycles
(a) PEHdataset
)%(
ycaruccA
100
90
80
70
60 Same day
Different day
50
(b) EEHdataset
1 2 3 4 5
Number of gait cycles
)%(
ycaruccA
100
90
80
70
60
Indoor
Outdoor
50
1 2 3 4 5
Number of gait cycles
(c) PEHdataset
)%(
ycaruccA
100
90
80
70
60
Indoor
Outdoor
50
(d) EEHdataset
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
FAR
RRF
1
PEH-active attacker
Acc-active attacker
PEH-passive attacker 0.8
Acc-passive attacker
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
FAR
(e) PEHdataset
RRF
EEH-active attacker
Acc-active attacker
EEH-passive attacker
Acc-passive attacker
(f) EEHdataset
Fig. 13: Evaluation results: (a)-(d) robustness to gait variations. (e)-(f) robustness against attackers.
using SVM, KNN and NB, then we apply majority voting SRC on each step and then obtain the final results by major-
scheme to combine the results together, the subject with the ity voting scheme. We found that MSSRC is approximately
highest voting is declared to be the recognized person. Again, 3%−7% more accurate than direct majority voting on our
we set σ = 75% and calculate the recognition accuracy of dataset since it exploits the sparsity information of multiple
different methods by varying k from 1 to 5 (number of gait measurements.Duetolimitedspace,wedonotplottheresults
cycles). From the results in Figure 12(b), we find that KEH- of direct major voting in this paper.
Gait consistently achieves the best performance and is up to
10% more accurate than the second best approach (i.e., NB).
E. Robustness to Gait Variations
The improvement of MSSRC over other methods is because
MSSRC exploits the sparsity information from multiple gait To evaluate the robustness of KEH-Gait to gait variations,
cycles. weconductthefollowingtwoexperiments:differentdayevalu-
ationanddifferentenvironmentevaluation.Inthisexperiment,
PerformanceonEEHdataset.Weperformthesamesteps
same day evaluation means the training set and test set are
as above on EEH dataset and plot the results in Figure 12(c)
chosen from the sessions of the same day while different
andFigure12(d).TheresultsshowthatKEH-Gaitis6%better
days evaluation chooses the sessions from two different days
than NB when σ =75%, k =1, and 4% better than NB when
separated by 1 week. Similarly, in different environment eval-
σ = 75%, k = 5. We also find that the overall performance
uations, indoor evaluation means the training set and test set
on EEH dataset is lower than that on PEH dataset. We believe
are chosen from indoor environment while outdoor evaluation
the drop on recognition accuracy is caused by the fact that the
chooses training data and test data from outdoor environment.
magnet is not sensitive to slight vibrations and motions.
We conduct this evaluation on PEH dataset and EEH dataset
The results in this section suggest that the proposed respectively. As the results in Figure 13(a) and Figure 13(b),
MSSRCinKEH-Gaitcanimproverecognitionaccuracysignif- the accuracy of different day is lower than the same day
icantlybyfusingseveralstepstogetherandoutperformseveral evaluation as the different days evaluation tends to produce
state-of-the-art classification algorithms. Another straightfor- more changes to gait. However, KEH-Gait can still achieve
ward method to apply SRC on multiple steps is to first apply the accuracy of 95% and 89% on the two dataset respectively
10when more than 5 steps are used. This observation holds in respectively. The results indicate that the PEH-based system
the different environment evaluation. From Figure 13(c) and can achieve comparable EER compared to the accelerometer-
Figure 13(d), we can see outdoor environment achieves lower based system. The individual nature of walking gait provides
accuracy than indoor environment because it includes several our scheme security against impersonation attackers and the
different terrains such as grass path and asphalt road. Gait evaluation results are encouraging. The false negatives occur
changes can be caused many other factors such as speed and whenthegaitpatternsoftheimposteranduserareclose.This
shoes etc.. We further discuss the influence of these factors in problemcouldbedealtwithbyusingtwofactorauthentication.
Section VIII-B.
VII. ENERGYCONSUMPTIONPROFILE
F. Robustness Against Attackers Battery lifetime is widely regarded as the major barrier of
achieving long term human-centric sensing. Reducing system
As mentioned in Section III, we assume the presence of a
energy consumption has attracted tremendous research efforts
passive adversary and an active attacker during an authentica-
in both academics and industries. In this section, we will
tionsession.Weevaluatetherobustnessoftheproposedsystem
conduct an extensive energy consumption profiling of state-
againsttheeavesdropperandactiveattackerbyconductingthe
of-the-art wearable systems.
following two imposter attempt experiments.
The energy consumption of our system consists of three
• A passive imposter attempt is an attempt when an
parts: sensor sampling, memory reading/writing, and data
imposter performs authentication using his own walk-
transmission. We find that memory reading/writing consumes
ing pattern. This attack happens when the genuine
significant less energy compared to the other two parts. A
user passes his device to another person to spoof the
recent study [34] also investigates the energy consumption of
healthcare system.
different Random Access Memory (RAM) technologies, and
• Anactiveimposterattemptmeanstheimpostermimics their findings support our measurement results. According to
the gait of the genuine user with the aim to spoof their measurement, it only consumes 203pJ to write to (or
the healthcare system. This attack happens when the read from) Static Random Access Memory (SRAM) which is
several users collude to fool the healthcare system. used in SensorTag. That means if we collect 5s gait data at
40Hz, it only takes 5×40×203 =40.6nJ to read or write
Thefirstexperimentisconductedtoevaluatetherobustness data. Compared to the energy consumption of other parts, the
to a passive imposter. In this experiment, we use the raw energy consumed by SRAM is negligible. Therefore, we only
voltagesignalfromothersubjectsaspassiveimposterattempts. consider the energy consumption of sensor sampling and data
We then repeat this experiment by testing all the steps of transmission in our evaluation.
the 20 subjects in the dataset. To evaluate the robustness
against the second imposter attack scenario, we group the 20
A. Measurement Setup
subjects into 10 pairs. Each subject was told to mimic his/her
partner’s walking style and try to imitate him or her. Firstly, The Texas Instrument SensorTag is selected as the target
oneparticipantofthepairactedasanimposter,theotheroneas device, which is embedded with the ultra-low power ARM
agenuineuser,andthentheroleswereexchanged.Thegenders Cortex-M3 MCU that is widely used by today’s mainstream
of the imposter and the user were the same. They observed wearable devices such as FitBit. The SensorTag is running
the walking style of the target visually, which can be easily with the Contiki 3.0 operating system. The experiment setup
done in a real-life situation as gait cannot be hidden. Every for the power measurement is shown in Figure 14(a). In order
attacker made 5 active imposter attempts. The authentication to capture both the average current and the time requirement
accuracyisevaluatedbyFPRandFNR.Ingeneral,FPRrelates for each sampling event, the Agilent DSO3202A oscilloscope
to the security of the system, while FNR to the usability. is used. As shown in the figure, we connect the SensorTag
An interesting point in the Decision Error Trade-off (DET) with a 10Ω resistor in series and power it using a 3V coin
curve is the Equal Error Rate (EER) where FPR=FNR. For battery. The oscilloscope probe is then connected across the
instance, an EER of 5% means that out of 100 genuine trials resistor to measure the current going through.
5 is incorrectly rejected, and out of 100 imposter trials 5 are
wrongfully accepted. We set k = 5 and vary the confidence B. Energy Consumption of Sensor Sampling
threshold C to plot DET curve in Figure 13.
1)Power Consumption of Sampling Accelerometer: The
The results on two dataasets are plotted in Figure 13(e) SensorTag includes 9-axis digital MPU9250 motion sensor
and Figure 13(f) respectively. The red dash line stands for the combining gyroscope, digital compass, and accelerometer.
possible points where FPR is equal to FNR. The crossover During the power measurements, we only enable the 3-axis
(marked as a diamond) of the red dash line and FPR-FNR accelerometer and leave all the other sensors turned off. The
curve stands for the location of the EER. We notice that accelerationsignalissampledusingtheInter-IntegratedCircuit
EER of KEH-Gait is 8.4% and 14.1% on the two datasets (I2C) bus with a sampling frequency of 25Hz. Note that,
respectively, which means out of 100 passive imposter trials 8 it is also possible for the wearable devices to use analog
are wrongfully accepted by using PEH and 14 are wrongfully accelerometers, which can be sampled through analog-to-
accepted by using EEH. We also find that an imposter does digital converter (ADC) instead of I2C bus. Sampling analog
benefit from mimicking the genuine user’s walking style. The accelerometers could avoid power consumption and additional
EER increases to 13.3% and 17.1% on the two datasets time requirement due to the I2C bus, but at the expense of
respectively. For the accelerometer-based system, the EER of some processing costs in analog to digital converting. While
a passive attacker and an active attacker are 6.8% and 11.6%, it is not immediately obvious whether analog accelerometer
11MCU wakes up to sample periodically. MCU wakes up to sample periodically.
10 Ohm Resistor
VDD(+) GND MCU in deep-sleep mode. MCU in deep-sleep mode.
TI SensorTag Oscilloscope Probe 3 Volts Battery
Boot Delay Start-up Delay
S_sleep S_sleep
S_slS ee1 p S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S1
(a) Experimentalsetupforpowermeasurement. (b) Profilingofaccelerometersampling. (c) Profilingofvoltagesampling.
Fig. 14: Measurement setup and results.
sampling would be less or more power consuming relative
TABLE II: States of voltage sampling.
to the digital counterpart, a detailed measurement study [35]
indicatesthatdigitalaccelerometerismorepowerefficientthan Time Power
State
the comparable analog ones from the same manufacturers. (ms) (µW)
S1 0.6 480
S sleep null 6
TABLE I: States of accelerometer sampling, which takes
17.2ms in total and consumes 322µW.
3)Energy Consumption Comparison: We now compare
Time Power the energy consumption of sampling accelerometer and KEH.
State
(ms) (uW)
In general, for the duty-cycled gait-recognition system, the
S1 0.6 768
S2 7.2 72 average power consumption in data sampling, P sense, can be
S3 0.6 480 obtained by the following equation:
S4 3.2 72
S5 4 480 (cid:40)
S
S sl6
eep
n1 u.6
ll
14 640
P
sense
=
PT 1S 0× 00nP sample+(1− T 1S 0× 00n)P sleep ii ff 0 10≤ 00n <≤ n.1 T0 S00,
sample TS
Figure 14(b) shows the details of accelerometer sampling (7)
energy profile. As shown, each accelerometer sampling event where, P sample is the average power consumption in the
can be divided into six states. At the beginning of each event, sampling event (either sampling acceleration or KEH sig-
the MCU is waked up by the software interrupt from the nal), and P sleep is the average power consumption when
power-saving deep-sleep mode (S sleep), and it boots the the MCU is in deep-sleep mode (with all the other system
accelerometer (S1) before going back to sleep. During S2, components power-off). n is the sampling frequency, and T S
the accelerometer starts to power up while the MCU is in is the duration of time (in milli-second) spent in a single
sleep mode. Then, after one software clock tick (7.8 ms in sampling event. Based on the measurement results given in
Contiki OS), the MCU wakes up again by the interrupt to Table I and Table II, we can obtain the average power
initialize the accelerometer (S3) and then goes back to sleep. consumption for the accelerometer sampling event equals to
The accelerometer starts initializing in S4 and turning on in 322µW with a time requirement of 17.2ms, and 480µW with
S5. Finally, MCU wakes up in S6 to sample the acceleration a duration of 0.6ms for the KEH sampling event. Then,
signal and then goes back to deep-sleep again. The average based on Equation 7, we get the power consumption in data
power consumption and time requirement for each state are sampling for both accelerometer-based and KEH-based gait-
shown in Table I. recognition systems with different sampling frequencies. The
results are compared in Figure 15. It is clear to see that
2)Power Consumption of Sampling KEH: In this subsec-
the proposed KEH-Gait achieves significant power saving in
tion, we investigate the power consumption in sampling the
datasampling,comparingwiththeconventionalaccelerometer-
voltage signal of the power source. During the measurement,
based gait-recognition system. More specifically, given the
MCU is programmed to periodically sample the voltage of
analysis shown in Figure 11(a), a sampling rate higher than
the lithium coin battery with 25Hz sampling rate. The MCU
40Hz is needed to achieve high recognition accuracy. With
reads voltage signal through ADC. Figure 14(c) shows the
a 40Hz sampling frequency, in case of data sampling, KEH-
details of voltage sampling. Similar to the accelerometer, the
Gait consumes 17.38µW, while the power consumption of
MCUgoesbacktodeep-sleepmodeaftereachsamplingevent.
accelerometer-based system is 230.74µW.
However, sampling the voltage takes only 0.6ms, which is
much shorter than the 17.2ms required by the accelerometer As can be seen from Figure 11(c), to achieve the same
sampling. This is because the MCU can read the voltage recognition accuracy, it needs to collect 3 gait cycles for the
signal directly without having to prepare the hardware to be accelerometer-based system and 5 gait cycles for the KEH-
powered-up,andthevoltagesignaltobepreparedbythepower basedsystem.Ifweassumeonegaitcycletakes1s(theaverage
source. The details of power consumption and time duration time of one gait cycle is between 0.8s-1.2s), this results in
for voltage sampling event are shown in Table II. 86.9µJ and 692.22µJ energy consumption in data sampling
12)W300
TABLE III: Comparison between PEH and EEH used.
(cid:1)
(
n
o itp m200
A Kc Ec He -l be aro sm edeter-based
(cm×S ci mze
×cm)
(W gre ai mgh st
)
Ac (c %ur )acy P (uow We )r (UC Sos Dt
)
u s PEH 4.6×3.3×0.1 23.5 86.1 1 157
n o100 EEH 4.7×0.8×0.8 65 75.2 19.17 37.5
C
re purpose. Specifically, we focus on two types of kinetic en-
w
o P 0 ergy harvester: PEH and EEH. Our study demonstrates the
1 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
harvested power signal caused by human gait motions can be
Sampling Frequency (Hz)
used to identify different individuals. Table III summarizes a
Fig. 15: Power consumption comparison. comparison between the PEH and EEH devices we used in
this paper.
for KEH-Gait and accelerometer-based system, respectively.
The first observation we can have is that the PEH we
used achieves higher recognition accuracy and generates more
C. Energy Consumption of Data Transmission
energy than EEH when the user is holding the device in the
Next, we evaluate the energy consumption of transmit- hand and walk normally. The results can be explained by our
ting acceleration and KEH voltage data via Bluetooth. We observation that the EEH contains a heavy magnet which is
conduct power measurement of the Bluetooth Low Energy not sensitive to weak vibrations and motions (compared in
(BLE) beacon using the embedded CC2650 wireless MCU Figure4(c)and4(e)).Thisresultsinaroughly10%difference
in the SensorTag. With the 40Hz sampling rate and 75% in the recognition accuracy.
compression rate, KEH-Gait generates 200 voltage samples
In addition to the system performance, another important
every five seconds. This results in 300 bytes data to be
characteristicindesigningawearabledeviceistheformfactor
transmitted in total (2 bytes for each of the 12-bits ADC
and weight. In case of the PEH device, we built it upon the
voltagereading).Thisconsumesanaveragepowerof2.72mW Volture V25W PEH energy harvester with a 4.6cm × 3.3cm
withatransmissiontimeof52ms,whichresultsin106.08µJof
× 0.1cm form factor. And it can be further reduced to 2.2cm
energyconsumption.Ontheotherhand,as3-axisacceleration × 0.4cm × 0.1cm by exploiting smaller harvester produces
data is collected for 3s, it results in 540 bytes of data and the
such as the PPA-1022. On the other hand, the EEH device
energy consumption of transmitting those data is 190.94µJ.
requires large mass displacement to ensure the free movement
of magnet which makes it difficult to reduce the form factor.
D. Total Energy Saving Analysis Moreover, in order to generate more power from the PEH
device, a 20 grams tip mass is attached to the PEH device
Afterobtainingtheenergyconsumptionofsensorsampling
and results in an overall weight of 23.5 grams. Fortunately,
and data transmission, we investigate the potential of KEH-
with current advancement in PEH design, the overall weight
Gait for energy saving. Based on the measured results, the
of the PEH can be reduced to less than 10 grams without
energy consumption of KEH-Gait to complete one authentica-
significantly sacrificing the output power. In comparison, the
tion is approximately 192.98µJ, which has reduced the energy
EEH device includes a heavy magnet and results in a weight
consumptionoftheaccelerometer-basedsystem(883.16µJ)by
approximately 65 grams in total. Given the above facts, we
78.15%.
believethat PEHis moreconvenient to beembedded infuture
A recent study [35] tested the power consumption of six wearabledevicesthathavestrictconstraintinsizeandweight.
most commonly available accelerometers, and they found that
Finally, the price of the PEH we used in our prototype is
whenthesamplingrateis50Hz,themeanpowerconsumption
approximately157USD(Volture V25W),whilethe costofthe
of these accelerometers is 1542µW, and the minimum power
EEH we used is 37.5USD. Although both of the prices can be
consumption is 518µW. These accelerometers consume more
largely reduced with a larger quantity of purchase, the cost of
power than the one used in our experiments. These results
buildingthePEHdeviceishigherthanthatoftheEEHdevice.
indicate that KEH-Gait is still superior to most commonly
used accelerometers in terms of energy savings. On the other
B. Factors Affecting Gait Recognition
hand,thepowerconsumptionofaccelerometerscanbefurther
reduced by use of data buffers. For example, ADXL345 can Many factors exist that may impact the accuracy of a gait-
store 32 samples automatically without waking up the CPU. basedrecognitionsystem,suchasshoe,clothes,walkingspeed
However,similaroptimisationtechniquecanalsobeintegrated and terrain. Previous studies have shown that the accuracy
in the KEH-based system to reduce the system level energy will decrease when the test and training samples of the
consumption. In this way, the energy consumption of both person’s walking are obtained using different shoe types and
accelerometer-based system and KEH-based system will be clothes [36]. Indeed, as shown in Section VI-E, the accuracy
reduced. We defer the design optimization of buffer-enabled ofKEH-Gaitdecreaseswhensession1isusedfortrainingand
KEH-Gait to our future work. session2isusedfortesting.Thedatasetusedintheexperiment
ischallengingasitincludesthenaturalgaitchangesovertime
VIII. DISCUSSION (two sessions separated by 1 week), as well as gait variations
due to changing in clothes, terrain and shoes. However, KEH-
A. PEH v.s. EEH
Gait can still achieve the accuracy of 95% and 89% on the
In this study, we analyze the feasibility of using power two dataset respectively by the proposed MSSRC, which in
signal generated from energy harvester for gait recognition turndemonstratetherobustnessofKEH-Gaittogaitvariations.
13The focus of our study is to demonstrate the feasibility of gait calorieexpenditure.Followingthistrendofstudy,theproposed
recognition using KEH and improve its performance. Due to KEH-Gait utilizes the voltage signal generated by the kinetic
space limitation, we defer the analysis of different factors to energy harvester from walking to perform gait recognition.
our future work. In fact, there has been several attempts to By doing so, KEH-Gait can reduce the power consumption of
study the relationship between recognition performance and the gait recognition in the wearable device by not using the
different factors [36], [37]. For example, in terms of walking accelerometer.
speed, Muhammad and Claudia [37] found that normal walk X. CONCLUSION
hasbestresultsandfastwalkisabitbetterthanslowwalk.As
for different types of terrains, they reported that gravel walk In this paper, we explore the feasibility of using KEH
has better results than grass and inclined walk. We encourage to address the problem of user spoofing attacks in emerging
the reader to refer to [36], [38], [37] for more details. mobile healthcare systems. In particular, we present KEH-
Gait, a kinetic energy harvesting signal based gait recognition
systemforuserauthentication.Bynotusingtheaccelerometer,
IX. RELATEDWORK
the proposed KEH-Gait eliminates the need for powering the
Gait Recognition: Gait recognition has been well studied accelerometer, making gait recognition practical for future
in the literature. From the way how gait is collected, gait self-powered devices. We design and implement hardware
recognitioncanbecategorizedintothreegroups:visionbased, platforms to collect voltage data from two types of KEH,
floorsensorbased,andwearablesensorbased.Invisionbased PEH and EEH. Evaluation results based on a dataset of
gaitrecognitionsystem,gaitiscapturedfromaremotedistance 20 subjects show that, using a novel classification method
using video-camera. Then, video/image processing techniques (MSSRC), KEH-Gait is able to achieve recognition accuracy
are employed to extract gait features for further recognition. comparable to accelerometer-based gait recognition. Besides,
A large portion in the literature belong to this category [39], KEH-Gait improves recognition accuracy by up to 10% com-
[40], [41], [42]. In floor sensor based gait recognition, sensors paredtoseveralstate-of-the-artclassificationalgorithms.More
(e.g., force plates), which are usually installed under the floor, importantly, compared to conventional accelerometer-based
are used for capturing gait features, such as ground reaction gait detection, KEH-Gait can reduce energy consumption by
force (GRF) [43] or heel-to-toe ratio [44]. 78.15%. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work
that experimentally validates the feasibility of gait recognition
Compared with vision-based and other non-accelerometer
using KEH, and our results show that the output voltage
basedgaitmeasurements,accelerationcanreflectthedynamics
signal of energy harvester is a promising informative signal
of gait more directly and faithfully. For instance, accelerom-
for wearable authentication system.
eter based gait recognition do not suffer from the existing
problems for vision-based methods, like occlusions, clutter,
REFERENCES
and viewpoint changes. Existing works of wearable sensor [1] F.Albinali,S.Intille,W.Haskell,andM.Rosenberger,“Usingwearable
based gait recognition are mainly based on the use of body- activitytypedetectiontoimprovephysicalactivityenergyexpenditure
estimation,”inProceedingsoftheInternationalconferenceonUbiqui-
worn accelerometers. The first work of accelerometer based
touscomputing. ACM,2010,pp.311–320.
gait recognition is proposed by Ailisto et al. [8] and further
[2] J.Lester,C.Hartung,L.Pina,R.Libby,G.Borriello,andG.Duncan,
developedbyGafurovetal.[45].Intheinitialstages,dedicated
“Validated caloric expenditure estimation using a single body-worn
accelerometers were used and worn on different body posi- sensor,” in Proceedings of the International conference on Ubiquitous
tions, such as lower leg [45], waist [8], hip [46], hip pocket, computing. ACM,2009,pp.225–234.
chestpocketandhand[47].Withtheprevailingofsmartphone, [3] M. Rabbi, S. Ali, T. Choudhury, and E. Berke, “Passive and in-situ
researchers have proposed several gait-based authentication assessment of mental and physical well-being using mobile sensors,”
in Proceedings of the 13th international conference on Ubiquitous
systems by utilizing the built-in accelerometer [48], [4], [49].
computing. ACM,2011,pp.385–394.
In a previous work, the researchers analyzed human gait by
[4] Y. Ren, Y.Chen, M. C. Chuah,and J. Yang, “Smartphonebased user
a shoe-embedded piezoelectric energy harvester [50]. Weitao
verificationleveraginggaitrecognitionformobilehealthcaresystems,”
et al. [51] proposed an automatic key generation system for inSensor,MeshandAdHocCommunicationsandNetworks(SECON),
on-body devices by using gait. 201310thAnnualIEEECommunicationsSocietyConferenceon. IEEE,
2013,pp.149–157.
Studies on KEH: There has been extensive studies on
[5] Y. Ren, J. Yang, M. C. Chuah, and Y. Chen, “Mobile phone enabled
wearable sensors. However, wearable sensors consume power social community extraction for controlling of disease propagation in
and most existing wearable products are powered by batteries. healthcare,”in2011IEEEEighthInternationalConferenceonMobile
Therefore, frequent recharge and replacement of the batteries Ad-HocandSensorSystems. IEEE,2011,pp.646–651.
are required, which has become the main obstacle on the way [6] D. Cunado, M. S. Nixon, and J. N. Carter, “Automatic extraction and
descriptionofhumangaitmodelsforrecognitionpurposes,”Computer
of achieving continuous gait recognition. To overcome this
VisionandImageUnderstanding,vol.90,no.1,pp.1–41,2003.
problem, researchers are investigating to use the output signal
[7] D. Gafurov, K. Helkala, and T. Søndrol, “Gait recognition using
from KEH to achieve a wide range of applications in activity
accelerationfrommems,”inAvailability,ReliabilityandSecurity,2006.
tracking [15], [52] and health monitoring [53]. In [15], [52], ARES2006.TheFirstInternationalConferenceon. IEEE,2006,pp.
the authors proposed the idea of using the energy harvesting 6–pp.
power signal for human activities recognition. Their proposed [8] H.J.Ailisto,M.Lindholm,J.Mantyjarvi,E.Vildjiounaite,andS.-M.
systemcanachieve83%ofaccuracyforactivitiesrecognition. Makela,“Identifyingpeoplefromgaitpatternwithaccelerometers,”in
DefenseandSecurity. InternationalSocietyforOpticsandPhotonics,
In [53], the authors conducted the first experiment study of
2005,pp.7–14.
using the output voltage signal from the PEH to estimate
[9] Y.Zhang,G.Pan,K.Jia,M.Lu,Y.Wang,andZ.Wu,“Accelerometer-
calorie expenditure of human activities. They have shown
basedgaitrecognitionbysparserepresentationofsignaturepointswith
promising results of replacing accelerometer using KEH for clusters,”2014.
14[10] M.Rostami,A.Juels,andF.Koushanfar,“Heart-to-heart(h2h):authen- inProceedingsofthe11thACMConferenceonEmbeddedNetworked
tication forimplanted medical devices,”in CCS’ 2013. ACM, 2013, SensorSystems. ACM,2013,p.21.
pp.1099–1112. [34] M.Moreau,“Estimatingtheenergyconsumptionofemergingrandom
[11] M.Gorlatova,J.Sarik,G.Grebla,M.Cong,I.Kymissis,andG.Zuss- accessmemorytechnologies,”2013.
man, “Movers and shakers: Kinetic energy harvesting for the internet [35] F. Bu¨sching, U. Kulau, M. Gietzelt, and L. Wolf, “Comparison and
of things,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGMETRICS Performance validation of capacitive accelerometers for health care applications,”
EvaluationReview,vol.42,no.1. ACM,2014,pp.407–419. Computer methods and programs in biomedicine, vol. 106, no. 2, pp.
[12] T. Von Bu¨ren, P. D. Mitcheson, T. C. Green, E. M. Yeatman, A. S. 79–88,2012.
Holmes,andG.Tro¨ster,“Optimizationofinertialmicropowergenera- [36] S.Enokida,R.Shimomoto,T.Wada,andT.Ejima,“Apredictivemodel
torsforhumanwalkingmotion,”SensorsJournal,IEEE,vol.6,no.1, for gait recognition,” in 2006 Biometrics Symposium: Special Session
pp.28–38,2006. on Research at the Biometric Consortium Conference. IEEE, 2006,
[13] J. Yun, S. N. Patel, M. S. Reynolds, and G. D. Abowd, “Design and pp.1–6.
performanceofanoptimalinertialpowerharvesterforhuman-powered [37] M. Muaaz and C. Nickel, “Influence of different walking speeds
devices,”MobileComputing,IEEETransactionson,vol.10,no.5,pp. and surfaces on accelerometer-based biometric gait recognition,” in
669–683,2011. Telecommunications and Signal Processing (TSP), 2012 35th Interna-
[14] P. D. Mitcheson, E. M. Yeatman, G. K. Rao, A. S. Holmes, and tionalConferenceon. IEEE,2012,pp.508–512.
T.C.Green,“Energyharvestingfromhumanandmachinemotionfor [38] D.GafurovandE.Snekkenes,“Gaitrecognitionusingwearablemotion
wireless electronic devices,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 96, no. 9, recordingsensors,”EURASIPJournalonAdvancesinSignalProcess-
pp.1457–1486,2008. ing,vol.2009,p.7,2009.
[15] S. Khalifa, M. Hassan, and A. Seneviratne, “Pervasive self-powered [39] T.H.LamandR.S.Lee,“Anewrepresentationforhumangaitrecog-
humanactivityrecognitionwithouttheaccelerometer,”inProceedings nition: Motion silhouettes image (msi),” in Advances in Biometrics.
oftheInternationalConferenceonPervasiveComputingandCommu- Springer,2005,pp.612–618.
nications. IEEE,2015,pp.79–86.
[40] A. Kale, A. Sundaresan, A. Rajagopalan, N. P. Cuntoor, A. K. Roy-
[16] A.Bilbao,D.Hoover,J.Rice,andJ.Chapman,“Ultra-lowpowerwire- Chowdhury, V. Kru¨ger, and R. Chellappa, “Identification of humans
less sensing for long-term structural health monitoring,” Sensors and using gait,” Image Processing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 13, no. 9,
Smart Structures Technologies for Civil, Mechanical, and Aerospace pp.1163–1173,2004.
Systems(SanDiego,California,USA,),pp.798109–14,2011.
[41] Z. Liu and S. Sarkar, “Improved gait recognition by gait dynamics
[17] “AMPY,”http://www.getampy.com/ampy-move.html//. normalization,”PatternAnalysisandMachineIntelligence,IEEETrans-
[18] “SOLEPOWER,”http://www.solepowertech.com/#new-page//. actionson,vol.28,no.6,pp.863–876,2006.
[19] “KINERGIZER,”http://kinergizer.com/. [42] J.HanandB.Bhanu,“Individualrecognitionusinggaitenergyimage,”
[20] F. Lu, H. Lee, and S. Lim, “Modeling and analysis of micro piezo- Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on,
electricpowergeneratorsformicro-electromechanical-systemsapplica- vol.28,no.2,pp.316–322,2006.
tions,”SmartMaterialsandStructures,vol.13,no.1,p.57,2003. [43] R. J. Orr and G. D. Abowd, “The smart floor: a mechanism for
[21] M. Kim, M. Hoegen, J. Dugundji, and B. L. Wardle, “Modeling and naturaluseridentificationandtracking,”inCHI’00extendedabstracts
experimental verification of proof mass effects on vibration energy onHumanfactorsincomputingsystems. ACM,2000,pp.275–276.
harvesterperformance,”SmartMaterialsandStructures,vol.19,no.4, [44] L. Middleton, A. Buss, A. Bazin, M. S. Nixon et al., “A floor sensor
p.045023,2010. system for gait recognition,” in Automatic Identification Advanced
[22] J. M. Renno, M. F. Daqaq, and D. J. Inman, “On the optimal energy Technologies,2005.FourthIEEEWorkshopon. IEEE,2005,pp.171–
harvesting from a vibration source,” Journal of sound and vibration, 176.
vol.320,no.1,pp.386–405,2009. [45] D.Gafurov,K.Helkala,andT.Søndrol,“Biometricgaitauthentication
[23] D. J. Ewins, Modal testing: theory and practice. Research studies using accelerometer sensor,” Journal of computers, vol. 1, no. 7, pp.
pressLetchworth,1984,vol.15. 51–59,2006.
[24] S. Ravi, A. Raghunathan, and S. Chakradhar, “Tamper resistance [46] D.Gafurov,E.Snekkenes,andT.E.Buvarp,“Robustnessofbiometric
mechanisms for secure embedded systems,” in VLSI Design, 2004. gait authentication against impersonation attack,” in On the Move to
Proceedings.17thInternationalConferenceon. IEEE,2004,pp.605– Meaningful Internet Systems 2006: OTM 2006 Workshops. Springer,
611. 2006,pp.479–488.
[25] L.Guan,J.Xu,S.Wang,X.Xing,L.Lin,H.Huang,P.Liu,andW.Lee, [47] E. Vildjiounaite, S.-M. Ma¨kela¨, M. Lindholm, R. Riihima¨ki,
“From physical to cyber: Escalating protection for personalized auto V. Kyllo¨nen, J. Ma¨ntyja¨rvi, and H. Ailisto, “Unobtrusive multimodal
insurance,”inSensys,2016. biometricsforensuringprivacyandinformationsecuritywithpersonal
devices,”inPervasiveComputing. Springer,2006,pp.187–201.
[26] H.Liu,S.Saroiu,A.Wolman,andH.Raj,“Softwareabstractionsfor
trustedsensors,”inMobisys. ACM,2012,pp.365–378. [48] H.Lu,J.Huang,T.Saha,andL.Nachman,“Unobtrusivegaitverifica-
tionformobilephones,”inProceedingsoftheInternationalSymposium
[27] Y. Shen, W. Hu, M. Yang, B. Wei, S. Lucey, and C. T. Chou, “Face
onWearableComputers. ACM,2014,pp.91–98.
recognitiononsmartphonesviaoptimisedsparserepresentationclassifi-
cation,”inProceedingsoftheInternationalSymposiumonInformation [49] C. Nickel, T. Wirtl, and C. Busch, “Authentication of smartphone
ProcessinginSensorNetworks. IEEE,2014,pp.237–248. usersbasedonthewaytheywalkusingk-nnalgorithm,”inIntelligent
InformationHidingandMultimediaSignalProcessing(IIH-MSP),2012
[28] A. Brajdic and R. Harle, “Walk detection and step counting on
EighthInternationalConferenceon. IEEE,2012,pp.16–20.
unconstrained smartphones,” in Proceedings of the international joint
conferenceonPervasiveandubiquitouscomputing. ACM,2013,pp. [50] J.ZhaoandZ.You,“Ashoe-embeddedpiezoelectricenergyharvester
225–234. forwearablesensors,”Sensors,vol.14,no.7,pp.12497–12510,2014.
[29] S.Butterworth,“Onthetheoryoffilteramplifiers,”WirelessEngineer, [51] W.Xu,G.Revadigar,C.Luo,N.Bergmann,andW.Hu,“Walkie-talkie:
vol.7,no.6,pp.536–541,1930. Motion-assisted automatic key generation for secure on-body device
communication,”inIPSN. IEEE,2016,pp.1–12.
[30] F.GloverandM.Laguna,TabuSearch. Springer,2013.
[52] S. Khalifa, M. Hassan, A. Seneviratne, and S. K. Das, “Energy
[31] J. Wright, A. Yang, A. Ganesh, S. Sastry, and Y. Ma, “Robust face
harvesting wearables for activity-aware services,” Internet Computing,
recognitionviasparserepresentation,”PAMI,pp.210–227,2009.
IEEE,vol.19,no.5,pp.8–16,2015.
[32] W. Xu, Y. Shen, N. Bergmann, and W. Hu, “Sensor-assisted face
[53] G. Lan,S. Khalifa, M.Hassa, and W.Hu, “Estimating calorieexpen-
recognitionsystemonsmartglassviamulti-viewsparserepresentation
diturefromoutputvoltageofpiezoelectricenergyharvester-anexperi-
classification,”inIPSN. ACM,2016.
mentalfeasibilitystudy,”inProceedingsofthe10thEAIInternational
[33] B.Wei,M.Yang,Y.Shen,R.Rana,C.T.Chou,andW.Hu,“Real-time ConferenceonBodyAreaNetworks(BodyNets),2015.
classification via sparse representation in acoustic sensor networks,”
15