Towards Implicit Visual Memory-Based
Authentication
Claude Castelluccia Markus Du¨rmuth and Maximilian Golla Fatma Deniz
Inria Grenoble Ruhr-University Bochum University of California, Berkeley
claude.castelluccia@inria.fr {markus.duermuth,maximilian.golla}@rub.de fatma@berkeley.edu
Abstract—Selecting and remembering secure passwords puts Thispaperexploresanewtypeofknowledge-basedauthen-
a high cognitive burden on the user, which has adverse effects tication scheme that eases the high cognitive load of explicit
on usability and security. Authentication schemes based on passwords and thus has the potential to improve the usability
implicit memory can relieve the user of the burden of actively and security of knowledge-based authentication. In particular,
remembering a secure password. In this paper, we propose a
westudyhowimplicitmemorycanbeusedtodesignausable,
newauthenticationscheme(MooneyAuth)thatreliesonimplicitly
deployable, and secure authentication scheme.
remembering the content of previously seen Mooney images.
These images are thresholded two-tone images derived from Currentknowledge-basedauthenticationschemesarebased
images containing single objects. Our scheme has two phases:
on explicit memory, where users are asked to create a random
Intheenrollmentphase,auserispresentedwithMooneyimages,
combination of characters as their authentication secret and
their corresponding original images, and labels. This creates an
to explicitly provide this secret at the time of authentication.
implicit link between the Mooney image and the object in the
Such secrets are usually very difficult to remember as one
user’s memory that serves as the authentication secret. In the
authenticationphase,theuserhastolabelasetofMooneyimages, has to work consciously to remember the specific secret. In
a task that gets performed with substantially fewer mistakes if contrast, with an implicit memory-based scheme, users first
the images have been seen in the enrollment phase. We applied learn an association between a task and its solution. This
an information-theoretical approach to compute the eligibility of learned association is then used as the authentication secret.
theuser,basedonwhichimageswerelabeledcorrectly.Thisnew Because recalling a situation that is stored in the implicit
dynamic scoring is substantially better than previously proposed memory is remembered with less effort [36], [37], almost
staticscoringbyconsideringthesurprisaloftheobservedevents.
unconsciously, such an authentication scheme relieves users
We built a prototype and performed three experiments with
of the high cognitive burden of remembering an explicit
230 and 70 participants over the course of 264 and 21 days,
password. This has the potential to offer usable, deployable,
respectively. We show that MooneyAuth outperforms current
and secure user authentication.
implicit memory-based schemes, and demonstrates a promising
newapproachforfallbackauthenticationproceduresontheWeb.
In this work, we built a novel, operational authentica-
tion scheme utilizing implicit memory based on Mooney
images [31]. A Mooney image is a degraded two-tone image
of a single object. This object is usually hard to recognize at
I. INTRODUCTION
first sight and becomes easier to recognize when the original
image was presented to the user.
User authentication is an essential requirement for modern
websites as more and more access-controlled services move
Our scheme is composed of two phases: In the enrollment
online. Existing user authentication schemes are commonly
phase,theuserlearnstheassociationbetweenasetofMooney
based on something you know, such as passwords, something
images, their original versions, and labels describing the con-
you have, such as secure tokens, or something you are, such
tentoftheimage.Thisprocessisalsocalled“priming”.During
as biometry. These authentication schemes suffer from the
the authentication phase, a larger set of Mooney images, in-
competing requirements of security and usability [8], which
cludingtheprimedMooneyimagesfromtheenrollmentphase,
are hard to fulfill simultaneously. Furthermore, users seem
are displayed to the user. The user is then asked to provide a
to disfavor password-based authentication [32], [23], hence
label for the hidden object in each Mooney image. Using our
alternative schemes are becoming necessary [1]. Despite sub-
dynamic scoring algorithm, the system computes an authenti-
stantialresearchefforttoimprovethestate-of-the-art,currently
cation score and provides or denies access accordingly. Due
deployed authentication methods are far from optimal.
to relatively slow enrollment and authentication, the current
scheme seems particularly suited for fallback authentication,
also known as account recovery.
Permission to freely reproduce all or part of this paper for noncommercial
purposes is granted provided that copies bear this notice and the full citation
We conducted three experiments to identify practical pa-
on the first page. Reproduction for commercial purposes is strictly prohibited
without the prior written consent of the Internet Society, the first-named author rameters, to measure long-term effects, and to determine the
(for reproduction of an entire paper only), and the author’s employer if the performance of the scheme. We conducted Experiment 1 over
paper was prepared within the scope of employment. the course of 25 days with 360 participants of which 230
NDSS ’17, 26 February - 1 March 2017, San Diego, CA, USA
finished both phases. The results of this experiment were used
Copyright 2017 Internet Society, ISBN 1-891562-46-0
http://dx.doi.org/10.14722/ndss.2017.23292 for parameter selection. To identify long-term priming effectsofMooneyimageswere-invitedtheparticipantsafter264days The proposed scheme is based on a crafted computer game.
in Experiment 2. To validate the overall performance of the Whilethesecretcanbeusedforauthentication,theparticipant
scheme, we performed Experiment 3 with 70 new participants cannot be forced to reveal it since the user has no conscious
over the course of 21 days. knowledgeofit.Theauthorsperformanumberofuserstudies
using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk to validate their scheme.
A. Contributions Although the proposed idea is very interesting, performance
results show that their scheme is not practical and cannot be
Our contributions include:
used for real-world applications: the registration phase takes
1) We present a novel authentication scheme, based on more than 45 minutes for a single password and put a lot of
implicit visual memory, that outperforms existing ones cognitive burden on users.
in terms of false acceptance and false rejection rates, as 2)GraphicalAuthenticationSchemes: Anumberofgraph-
well as the time required for authentication. ical password schemes share the idea of identifying trained
2) To decide whether a user successfully passes the au- images from a set of decoy images. Probably the most well-
thentication phase, the inputs have to be evaluated, i.e., knownschemeisPassFaces[34],whichisbasedonthehuman
“scored.” We propose an alternative scoring technique, capabilitytorecognizefamiliarfaces.Duringauthentication,a
dynamic scoring, which is inspired by the notion of set of faces is shown to a user, where the user selects known
self-information, also known as surprisal. We show that ones.However,userbiasintheselectionoftheimagesrenders
our scoring technique substantially outperforms the static the system vulnerable to guessing attacks [14].
scoringproposedinpreviousworkbyDenningetal.[16].
3) We demonstrate the practicability of our scheme by TheauthenticationschemeUseYourIllusion[22]alsouses
implementing it and conduction three experiments. degraded versions of images, i.e., blurred images, but still
The results show that MooneyAuth substantially out- reliesonexplicitmemory.Inthisscheme,usersarerequiredto
performs current implicit memory-based authentication generateanimageportfolio,explicitlylearnandmemorizethe
schemes [16]. images belonging to the portfolio, i.e., via spaced repetitions,
4) We are the first to study long-term priming effects of and finally authenticate by re-identifying the set of images
Mooneyimagesoveraperiodaslongas8.5months.The that were distorted by an oil-painting filter. In contrast to
results reveal a substantial long-term priming effect for our evaluation, their user study did not test the long-term
Mooneyimages,whichimpliesthatMooneyAuthissuited performance,soitisunknownhowthisschemeperformsover
for fallback authentication with long intervals between time and whether it decreases the user’s cognitive burden.
enrollment and authentication. Furthermore,thesecurityofUseYourIllusionheavilydepends
on the image degrading algorithm and its parameters, which
might be identifiable by a computer vision algorithm. In
B. Related Work
contrast, we assume all images and their Mooney versions
1)Implicit Memory-Based Authentication Schemes: Ap- including the labels are known to the attacker and show
plying the knowledge about how humans store and recall in- that even in this case MooneyAuth is secure. Hence, the
formationwasfirstappliedtouserauthenticationbyWeinshall security of MooneyAuth does not rely on the fact that there
andKirkpatrick[43].However,theproposedschememadeuse is no algorithm, which can recover the original image and
of the explicit characterization of images that were stored in its label. Other graphical authentication schemes, based on
human memory, not implicit memory, and the performance of explicit memory, are surveyed in [4].
the proposed scheme is unsuitable for deployment.
3)Fallback Authentication Schemes: One prominent use
The scheme that comes closest to MooneyAuth, using caseforMooneyAuthisfallbackauthentication.Suchschemes
implicit memory and the priming effect, was proposed by are used to help users recover their forgotten passwords.
Denning et al. [16]. They presented an authentication scheme Depending on the deployed system, the effort (authentication
based on implicitly learning associations between degraded time, and workload) can be higher than in primary authen-
drawings of familiar objects (e.g., animals, vehicles, or tools) tication systems, which are used on a daily basis. However,
and their complete drawings. Each degraded drawing was cre- the authentication secret obviously requires to be memorable
ated by using fragmented lines instead of continuous lines. In for longer timeframes, since it must still be available in the
their paper, the authors presented a preliminary authentication case the primary means of authentication, e.g., the password
scheme and performed a user study. Their results show that is forgotten.
manyofthesedrawingsshowa(small)primingeffect,butthis
The range of currently proposed or deployed fallback
effect is too small for using it in an authentication scheme for
authentication systems is not truly satisfying. The most fre-
all but two images they tested. As agreed by the authors, the
quent systems are based on password reset via out-of-band
viability of such system concept is dependent upon being able
communicationorpersonalknowledgequestions.Intheformer
to systematically identify or create images with a sufficiently
case, a registered email address, a mobile phone number, or
strongprimingeffect.Ourpaperbuildsonthisworktopropose
a mobile app on a smartphone of the user [18] is used to
acompleteandefficientsystem.WeshowthatMooneyimages
send the original password, a new password, or a time-limited
provide a strong priming effect necessary to implement such
password reset link. However, receiving such password reset
a practical scheme, and we build a real prototype.
messages can be risky if not correctly implemented [10] and
Bojinovetal.alsoproposedtheconceptofimplicitlearning can be error-prone if the contact details on record are out of
to design a scheme that resists coercion attacks where the date.Furthermore,notallusersliketheideaofgivingouttheir
user is forcibly asked by an attacker to reveal the key [6]. cellphone number or email address due to privacy concerns.
2Even worse, receiving messages is not always possible, i.e., security properties in Section VII, and conclude with some
using mobile data while abroad, or the receiving device is not final remarks in Section VIII.
available.
Ifcommunicatingoverasecondarychannelisnotpossible,
II. BACKGROUND
personal knowledge questions, sometimes called cognitive A. Explicit vs. Implicit Memory
passwords, are used. The security of such systems is well
studied[45].However,asdemonstratedbyanumberofrecent Explicit memory is a type of memory that is based on
work [7], [9], [38], [21], their security is rather low, as the intentionalrecollectionofinformationwiththepurposetocon-
secret answers to the asked questions can be easily guessed. sciouslyrecallthisinformationatalatertime.Weusethistype
of memory, also referred to as declarative memory, constantly
Renaud et al. [35] introduced a scheme based on asso- in our daily life [20]. For example when we remember the
ciations between images and text (selected by the user) as time of our flight the next day, recall our address, or a chain
a potential replacement for security questions. However, their of strings that forms our passwords.
approachsuffersfromthedrawbacksofexplicitmemory-based
schemes. In contrast, implicit memory relies on the unintentional
recollection of information. In this case, we are not aware
Authentication using information about the social graph of the specific information we stored in our memory, but we
of a user, so-called social authentication, has been demon- can easily recall the information. This type of memory, also
strated [12], [39]. Facebook deployed such a social scheme referredtoasnondeclarativememory,canusuallybeobserved
called Trusted Contacts. As a secondary fallback-mechanism in habitual behavior, such as riding a bicycle or playing an
users can choose up to five friends that receive parts of a instrument [20]. The cognitive and neural mechanisms of
recovery code via email in the case the user has forgotten explicit and implicit memory are not entirely understood [19].
the password. By collecting three or more parts of the code Some studies suggest a distinct mechanism for explicit and
one is able to reset the password. However, typical recovery implicit memory [36], [30], whereas others suggest a joint
timescanquicklyrisefromhourstodays,whichisapotential mechanism [3], [42]. One way to trigger implicit memory is
drawback of this approach. an effect called priming [29], [13]. Priming occurs when the
previousexposure(consciousorunconscious)toastimulusaf-
4)Associative and Repetitive Memory-Based Authentica-
fectstheperformanceofasubsequenttask.Forexample,when
tion Schemes: Recent work by Bonneau and Schechter [11]
a series of images with specific objects (primes) are presented
demonstrated that users are capable of remembering
to the participants, their recognition performance (e.g., time
cryptographically-strong secrets via spaced repetition. In their
and correctness) of a similar object in another or the same
experiment, they enabled users to learn a limited number of
image that is presented later improves. Throughout this paper,
strong authentication secrets by displaying an additional code
we use such priming effects that are based on repetition and
that was required to login. This code did not change and was
association.Inafirstenrollmentphase,wepresentparticipants
only shown after an annoying delay which was increased at
an association between a thresholded Mooney image and the
every login attempt. The users were motivated to accelerate
original image with a label. In a second authentication phase,
the login procedure and not wait for the code to display, by
we repeat the previously primed Mooney image (among other
entering the code, which they subliminally learned by heart,
non-primed Mooney images) and measure the recognition
due to its continuous repetition. After some of such fast and
performance of the repeated image. In some cases, priming
successful logins, the code was extended.
has been shown to have long-lasting effects [13].
Asimilaruserstudy,realizedbyBlockietal.[5],improved
the repetition idea. Based on so-called Person-Action-Object
B. Mooney Images
(PAO) stories they were able to combine associative and
repetitive memory to improve the concept. They asked their AMooneyimageisathresholded,two-toneimageshowing
participants to invent a story based on a shown photo, a user- a single object. This object is hard to recognize at first sight
chosen famous person, and a randomly selected action-object withrecognitiontimesinsecondtominuterange[25].Insome
pair that served as authentication secret. In contrast to [11], cases, the recognition is abrupt and gives rise to a feeling
the users were able to see the complete secret at once and of having solved a difficult problem (also known as the aha-
were told that they are required to learn the secret. Finally, feeling or Eureka-effect) [27]. This abrupt recognition can
the users were able to remember their secrets for longer times happen intrinsically [25], after the contour of the object is
with fewer rehearsals due to the PAO story mnemonic. marked [41], or after presenting the subject with the original
image [28], [24], [17]. Once a subject has seen the original
grayscale image from which the Mooney is generated, recog-
C. Outline
nition is much accelerated. An example of a Mooney image is
This paper is structured as follows: Section II introduces presented in Figure 11.
the concept of implicit memory and Mooney images. Our
The value of using Mooney images for authentication
schemeisdescribedinSectionIII.Then,wepresentdetailson
is that they are very likely to trigger brain processes that
the three experiments we performed. First, the pre-study for
are involved in implicit memory [2]. Implicit memory, as
estimating the required parameters in Section IV, a long-term
study proving that the priming effect of Mooney images last
1TounderstandtheeffectofMooneyimages,wesuggestthereadertospend
over time in Section V, and the main study demonstrating the
sometimetryingtoidentifytheobjectinFigure1,andthenlookatFigure7
general performance of the scheme in Section VI. We discuss attheendofthispaper.
3stated above, does not require direct conscious involvement the images are automatically downloaded and thresholded,
buthappenswithlesseffortincomparisontoexplicitmemory. a manual clean up session by human subjects needs to be
Triggering the implicit memory for authentication is therefore done.Thismanualcleaningsessionisnecessarybecausesome
desirable as it reduces the cognitive load for users. Priming is images that are automatically downloaded from the web may
one way to trigger implicit memory and Mooney images are not include the object that corresponds to the search word
excellent example that can be used to prime participants to (e.g.,cat),hence,needtoberemovedfromtheimageset[15].
specific concepts. Subsequently, a selection of suitable Mooney images took
place. While the original Mooney image database contained
330 images [25], for our experiments we considered images
withameanrecognitionrateof5secondsandlongerresulting
in 250 images. We further reduced this set to 120 images to
obtain enough samples per image for an estimated 100 partic-
ipants.
A suitable Mooney image for the purpose of this appli-
cation is an image that is difficult to recognize without a
previous explicit presentation of the original image. At the
same time, if the user has seen the original image then the
user should be able to correctly identify and label the hidden
object. This procedure makes use of implicit memory as the
usersfirstlearntheassociationbetweentheoriginalimageand
Fig. 1. Example of a Mooney image. To understand the effect of Mooney thecorrespondingMooneyimagewithoutanexpliciteffort.As
images,wesuggesttospendsometimetryingtoidentifythehiddenobject,
intheexampleofridingabike,usersusuallydonotremember
andthentolookatFigure7attheendofthispaper.
the details of the original image but can name the hidden
object in the Mooney image when they have previously seen
III. THEMOONEYAUTHSCHEME the original image. For some images, the object shown in the
Mooney image can be recognizable by a non-primed user as
In the next section, we describe the basic construction
well, but only after a relatively long time, whereas primed
of our authentication scheme. We first describe how Mooney
users will recognize it almost instantly. Therefore, within this
images are generated, and then present the two phases, enroll-
work, we will treat images with a recognition time beyond a
ment, and authentication, of our protocol.
set threshold as “likely not primed”.
A. Mooney Image Generation
B. Description
In this work, we use an extended set of two-tone, Mooney
images that contain not only faces as used originally [31], We use a (large) set of images I and their corresponding
but also objects (e.g., animals, fruits, or tools) of different Mooney images.
types [17], [25].
We selected our Mooney images from an automatically Enrollment (Priming) Phase
generated two-tone, Mooney image database [25]. This data-
• When a new user is enrolled, the server first assigns two
base is based on a large number of images collected from
disjoint subsets I ,I ⊂ I with |I | = |I | = k to the
P N P N
the Web. First, concrete nouns were selected from a linguistic
user. I reflects the primed images, I the non-primed
P N
database [44] (based on the directness of reference to sense
images.
experience,andcapacitytoarousenonverbalimages,cf.[25]).
• The subset I is then used to prime the user. During this
P
These words were used as search terms to automatically
session,firstaMooneyimage,thentheoriginalimageand
download images from an online image database. Second, the
a label that describes the object in the image is presented
images were converted to grayscale and were smoothed using
totheuser.Thisprocedurecreatesanassociationbetween
a 2D smooth operation with a Gaussian kernel (σ = 2 pixels
the original image, the correct label of the image and the
and full width at half maximum (FWHM) = 5 pixels). Third,
corresponding Mooney image.
imageswereresizedtohaveasizeof350×350pixels(subsam-
pled with an appropriate scale factor). These parameters were
Authentication (Recall) Phase
selected to create Mooney images that are hard to recognize
byauseratfirstsight[26].Thesmoothingoperationisinpar- • Atthebeginningoftheauthenticationphase,thetwosub-
ticular important for the results as the thresholding algorithm sets I ,I for this user are retrieved from the database.
P N
applied in the next stage operates better on smoothed images The primed and non-primed Mooney images (I ∪I )
P N
than on not smoothed ones. Lastly, the smoothed and resized are then presented to the user in a pseudo-randomized
imageswerethresholdedusingahistogrambasedthresholding order. For each Mooney image presentation, the user is
algorithm (Otsu’s thresholding method [33]) to generate the requested to type in the label of the object that the image
Mooney images. This thresholding method assumes that each contains, or skip the image if the user is not able to
image has two classes of pixel properties: A foreground and recognize any object.
a background. For each possible threshold, the algorithm • Two metrics are then computed for each image:
iteratively computes the separability of the two classes and (i)Thecorrectnessofthelabeliscomputedbycomparing
converges when the maximum separability is reached. Once the typed label to a list of previously defined labels. This
4isachievedbyadistancemetricthatmeasureshowsimilar getting approximations is relatively easy, and one should
thelabelprovidedbytheusermatchedthedefinedlabels. not rely on an assumed bound on their correctness.
(ii)Therecognitiontime,i.e.,thetimebetweendisplaying 3) Theadversaryisfreetoanswerthequestionsatanytime,
the image and the first keystroke. If the recognition time i.e., the answer times can be freely manipulated. (Even
is longer than 20 seconds, we treat the image as if the though the adversary cannot gain any advantage from
label were incorrect, i.e., “likely non-primed”. (We chose this with the current prototype, this may be relevant for
20 seconds as threshold as we expect the recognition alternative implementations that more carefully take the
for primed images to occur almost instantaneous, but answer time into account.)
then allow the user to hesitate a couple of seconds
Consequently, the security of the scheme solely relies on
before starting to type the label. From our experience,
the partition of the shown images into the primed and non-
recognition without being primed takes closer towards a
primed images, i.e., the sets I and I .
minute to happen.) P N
• Authentication is based on the hypothesis that the user
E. Static Scoring
labelstheprimedimagesmoreoften(andfaster)correctly
than those Mooney images that the user was not primed One straightforward scoring strategy, used by Denning et
on. Sometimes primed images will be labeled incorrectly al. [16], is what we call static scoring. We briefly describe
and vice versa. To tolerate some of these errors, we static scoring here so later we can compare our new scoring
compute a score from the correct and incorrect labels strategy, dynamic scoring, with it. There are four basic events
and accept a user if the reached score is above a specific that can occur for a single image:
threshold. There are several possibilities to perform this
scoring. After the necessary terminology is introduced in • A primed image (with index i) is
◦ labeled correctly:
the next section, we will discuss two scoring methods.
Occurs with probability p , assigned score s .
i p,c
◦ labeled incorrectly:
C. Terminology
Occurs with probability 1−p , assigned score s .
i p,f
Thissectionintroducessomeofthenotationsthatareused • A non-primed image (with index i) is
throughout this paper. For one specific image with index i ◦ labeled correctly:
(which is displayed to the user) there are four possible events Occurs with probability n , assigned score s .
i n,c
that we need to consider: the image was/was not primed for ◦ labeled incorrectly:
the user (i.e., it is in I or in I ), and the user provides Occurs with probability 1−n , assigned score s .
P N i n,f
a correct or an incorrect label for the image. We denote the
Now static scoring assigns the value 1 to the two “good”
probability that a (randomly chosen) user correctly labels a
events, i.e., s =1, s =1 and 0 to the two “bad” events
primedimagewithp ,andtheprobabilitythatausercorrectly p,c n,f
i s =0,s =0.Inotherwords,thisscoringstrategycounts
labels a non-primed image with n . We expect p to be larger p,f n,c
i i the “good” events that happened.
than n , and we denote the difference with d := p −n . A
i i i i
positive d indicates that priming is working for this image.
i
F. Dynamic Scoring
For a reasonably well-working priming, images should have
d i > 0.5. (Those are called “ideal” in [16], which is slightly Static scoring does not differentiate between different
misleadingas“ideal”inastrictsenseisd i =1.)InSectionIV probability values, thus loses information. We propose an
we will see that 1/3 of the total images have d i > 0.5, i.e., alternative method, dynamic scoring, which takes inspiration
we can identify a good amount of images that work well for from the notionof self-information or surprisal, a well-known
our authentication scheme. concept in information theory [40]. Self-information denotes
the information content associated with a single event, as
D. Adversary Model opposedtoentropywhichisapropertyofanentiredistribution.
We consider a strong adversary that has detailed informa- Theself-informationI(E∗)ofaneventE∗withprobability
tion about the image database I, but has no information about p is defined as
i
the subsets I and I . I(E∗)=−log(p ),
P N i
1) We assume the adversary knows the correct labels for all where we use logarithms to base e throughout this work. For
images in I. This is a strong assumption, as a substantial dynamic scoring, score each event with its surprisal, i.e.,
fraction of images are hard to label for humans if not
s =ln(p ), s =ln(1−p ),
primed. The rationale is that a motivated attacker may p,c i p,f i
spend substantial effort to label the images, automated s n,c =ln(n i), s n,f =ln(1−n i).
image search facilities might reveal the source image, or
Note that we invert the sign of I(E∗) so that a higher score
algorithmic classifiers may be able to label images. (We
refers to a better match, i.e., “less surprisal”. Consequently,
are unaware of any algorithm that can identify objects
the scores are negative.
in Mooney images, but we cannot guarantee that such
algorithm does not exist; thus we assume the attacker Foranintuitiononwhydynamicscoringimprovesonstatic
(artificially) knows all labels.) scoring consider the event E∗ that the user wrongly labels a
2) We assume the adversary knows the probabilities n and primed image. Let us assume a fixed “priming effect”, i.e.,
i
p . While knowing the exact values requires substantial the difference d = p − n = 0.5 is constant. We first
i i i i
work by the attacker (basically replicating our study), consider an image where p =0.5 (and thus n =0), i.e., the
i i
5primedimageislabeledcorrectlyandincorrectlywiththesame The data we collected about a participant cannot be linked
probability.ThentheeventE∗ doescarrylittleinformation,as back to a respondent, as the data is in quite broad categories
itisaplausibleoutcomeforalegitimate(primed)user.Second, only. We did not collect any personal identifiers (IP address,
we consider the case where p = 1 (and thus n = 0.5), then deviceidentifier,name,orsimilar),anddidnotusethird-party
i i
everyprimedimagewillbelabeledcorrectlybythelegitimate components that may still log such data. Before any data was
(primed) user. Thus, if event E∗ happens, we can be certain recorded, the respondents were informed about the purpose of
that it’s not the legitimate user participating in the protocol. theexperimentandhowthecontributeddatawillbemanaged,
Static scoring gives the same score 0 in both cases, while and that they can leave the experiment at any time.
dynamic scoring gives a score of −∞ and thus indicates that
this event can only be caused by an impostor. A. Experimental Setup
Legitimate (Primed) User Score. For the legitimate user, the We used a total of 120 images. For each participant, we
expected value of the score S for a single image with index used 10 primed images |I |=10 and 20 non-primed images
i P
i equals |I | = 20, i.e., an asymmetric distribution of primed and
N
non-primed images, randomly selected from the 120 images.
Choosing |I | to be larger than |I | helps to speedup the
N P
1
enrollmentprocess.Wedevelopedawebapplicationtoconduct
E(S ) = ·(p ·ln(p )+(1−p )·ln(1−p ))
i 2 i i i i the experiment and measured the parameters p ,n .
i i
1
+ ·(n ·ln(n )+(1−n )·ln(1−n )),
2 i i i i Enrollment (Priming) Phase. For the enrollment phase, a
random subset of |I | = 10 Mooney images was selected
P
which equals the average of the Shannon entropies of for each participant. Priming consisted of four steps:
Bernoulli-distributed random variables B and B with
1,pi 1,ni (i) Introduction: The experiment started with a brief intro-
mean p and n , respectively,
i i
duction and explanation of how the experiment will pro-
ceed.Weprovidedparticipantswiththenecessarywritten
1 explanationonthewebpagethatthisstudywasaboutan
E(S ) = (H(B )+H(B )),
i 2 1,pi 1,ni alternativeweb-basedauthenticationscheme.Participants
wereinformedaboutthetwoexperimentalphases(enroll-
where H(X) denotes the Shannon entropy, which is the ment and authentication). They were further informed to
expected value of the self-information H(X) = E[I(X)]. becontactedviaemail,aftertheenrollmentphase,totake
part in the authentication phase. Besides, we provided a
Adversary Score. The adversary does not know whether the link with further information about Mooney images and
image was primed or not (this is what the security of the implicit memory for the interested participant.
scheme rests on). Recall that we assume the adversary knows (ii) Priming 1: For each image from the subset I , we
P
the labels and knows the probabilities p i and n i. We assume first presented the Mooney image for 3.5 seconds, then
that the same number of images is primed and non-primed so the original gray-scale image for another 3.5 seconds,
that a single random image is primed with probability 1. An then again the Mooney image. To make the shifting
2
adversary can basically decide to give the correct label or the between the images more comprehensible, we gradually
wronglabel,basedontheknownprobabilities.Iftheadversary transitioned between the images, i.e., fading out the first
gives the correct label, the score (for that single image) will image, while fading in the second image. A label (a
be single English word) that described the hidden object
(s p,c+s n,c)/2=(ln(p i)+ln(n i))/2, in the image was displayed during the original gray-
scale image presentation. We consider this approach a
and if the adversary gives the incorrect label the score will be
reasonabletradeoffbetweengivingenoughtimetoprime
(s +s )/2=(ln(1−p )+ln(1−n ))/2. the image and spending time on the enrollment process.
p,f n,f i i
(iii) Survey: After the first priming phase, the participants
So an adversary can calculate both values and pick the one
were asked to fill out a short questionnaire with basic
that has a higher expected score.
questionssuchasage,fieldofwork,gender,andopinion
abouttheusabilityofcurrentwebauthenticationsystems.
IV. EXPERIMENT1:PRE-STUDY This survey was intended to provide the participants
with a short break before the second priming phase. In
A pre-study was performed to identify the critical param-
addition, we used the data collected from this survey for
eters of the MooneyAuth scheme. The critical parameters are:
a statistical assessment of the participants.
(1) p , the probability that a primed image is correctly labeled
i
(iv) Priming 2: In the second priming phase, we repeated
and (2) n , the probability that a non-primed image is labeled
i
the first priming phase for the same 10 images in a
correctly. From these values, we can then derive (3) the size
new pseudo-randomized order. Overall, users saw each
k of the sets I and I . These parameters were then used in
P N
Mooney image and its corresponding gray-scale image
the following experiments.
twice.
While there is no ethics committee covering this type of
studies at the organizations involved in this research, there Authentication (Recall) Phase. Participants were invited via
are strict laws and privacy regulations in place that must be emailtotakepartintheauthenticationphase.Eachparticipant
obeyed. The experiments comply with these strict regulations. was provided with an individual link. In order to test how
6long the effects of priming and authentication performance B. Implementation
lasted, we performed the authentication phase in two separate
To perform the experiments, we implemented a web ap-
groups at two different points in time (approximately two
plication based on the Model, View, Controller (MVC) de-
weeks apart). The authentication phase was composed of two
sign pattern. The front-end (View) is based on the Bootstrap
main steps:
framework to accelerate development, the back-end (Model
and Controller) is written in PHP, and data is stored in a
(i) Introduction: Before the authentication started the task MySQL database. To compute an edit distance during the
was described. Each participant was asked to view the authentication phase, we used a C implementation of the
Mooney image, and to label the hidden object in the Damerau-Levenshtein algorithm which was included as exter-
image as fast as possible. Participants were specifically nal PHP module. Data was transmitted using transport layer
asked to label each image using a single English word. security (TLS) to protect the privacy of the participants. To be
Importantly, participants were asked to label the images compliantwiththefederaldataprotectionactandprivacylaws,
regardless of what they have seen in the priming phase. userswereinformedaboutwhatdatawascollectedandhadto
If the participants could not identify the hidden object consent to the processing and storing of the data. Collected
(possiblybecausethisimagewasnotusedinthepriming data was stored in encrypted form. We used the free web
phase), they were asked to press the “I don’t know” analytics software Piwik on the web server to derive statistics
button. These instructions were provided in a written aboutthewebapplication’susage.Everyuserwasabletoopt-
form on the web page. out and the usage of the Do Not Track (DNT) HTTP header
(ii) Authentication: For each returning participant, we se- was honored.
lected a subset I ⊂ I \ I of size |I | = 20.
N P N
All Mooney images from the entire set I ∪I were
P N C. Matching Labels
presentedtotheparticipantsforlabelinginrandomorder.
The interface used for this labeling task can be seen in For each image, we created a small set of correct labels
Figure 2. (typically two to five labels). All labels were converted to
lowercase before comparison. We computed the Damerau-
Levenshtein distance (string edit distance considering inser-
tion, deletion, substitution, and transposition of adjacent let-
ters) between the provided label and all given labels for that
image. If one label had a distance less or equal to 1, we
marked it to be correct. This ensures that a variety of typical
deviations is accepted, such as simple spelling errors, plural
endings, British/American spelling differences, and such.
Although, the use of an open text field to provide answers
hasdrawbacksconsideringentrytimeanderrorrate(especially
on mobile devices), we decided not to use alternative methods
such as selecting the correct answer from multiple choice.
Previous work has shown that using multiple choice answers
leads to higher recognition rates for non-primed Mooney
images [28]. First, the number of choices gives us a lower
bound for the n and second providing a choice of labels
i
already exhibits priming effects.
D. User Participation
Fig.2. Screenshotoftheuserinterfaceduringtheauthenticationphase.
Participants were recruited via several email distribution
listsandsocialmedia.Tomotivateparticipants,weraffledgift
Please note that the website as used in Experiment 1 had cards to those who finished both phases. For this experiment,
a bug, which led to a layout change caused by an information 360peoplestartedtheenrollmentphase.Wesentout323invite
banner fading out during the labeling process in the authen- emailsfortheauthenticationphasebecause37participantshad
tication phase. This could have led participants to click the not finished their enrollment (6 stopped at the introduction
“Idon’tknow”buttonaccidentallyinsteadofselectingthetext tutorial, 16 during the first priming, 6 during the survey,
entry field. It seems very unlikely that this bug has affected 9 during the second priming). From those re-invited to the
the results: we have not received any feedback from the authentication phase 230 finished, 6 started but have not
participants mentioning this issue, the fading out related miss- finished, and 87 never tried to start the phase. A high dropout
clickcouldhaveonlyoccurredinspecificinstanceswithaslow rate between enrollment and authentication was expected, as
Internet connections, and when we filtered the participants we have not verified email addresses during the enrollment
that may have been affected based on the text input time the of Experiment 1 nor have we filtered obviously fake email
overall results even slightly improved. Furthermore, we fixed addresses. Furthermore, misclassification of our invite email
this potential issue for Experiments 2 and 3, and these report as spam might have occurred, as well, which would explain
very similar results. This confirms that the bug had minimal the high number of users that not even tried to start the
or no influence on the results. authentication phase.
7We collected, with users’ consent, basic statistics such as
country of origin and timing from the server logs, as well as
the results from a survey; a summary of the statistics can be
foundinAppendixA.Pleasenote,thereportednumbersofthe
questionnaireintheappendixdifferfromtheactualnumberof
participants, as providing answers was not mandatory. About
four out of five participants were between 20 and 30 years
old, but all age groups were represented, and about four out
of five were male. Most participants were from France and
Germany due to the mailing lists we used, but people from
over 30 countries participated. The majority of them liked to
use the MooneyAuth scheme.
As a result of the sampling process, the participants in
this and the following experiments are skewed towards young
and male participants working in the sciences. Previous work
found no evidence indicating differences in recognition rates
of Mooney images for gender or occupation of the primed
participants [25], [26], [27], [28]. Unfortunately, there is no
data available on priming effects in different age groups. Fig. 3. Priming effect comparison: pi versus ni plot for our scheme after
20days(points,blue)andpreviouswork[16]after28days(stars,black).
E. Results
3)Strictvs.RelaxedLabeling: Thewayweusefortesting
We now present the results of our first experiment that the labels for correctness may obviously affect the measured
helped us to estimate and test parameters (e.g., labeling). values (and thus the performance of the scheme). To evaluate
if the strict labeling, as described in Section IV-C, gives
1)Estimating p , n , and d : The main result of Ex-
i i i reasonable results, or whether more sophisticated measures
periment 1 is the estimation of the parameters p and n
i i (e.g., a lexical database that includes synsets to find related
for the tested images. We find that the average difference d
words)neededtobetaken,weadditionallyassessedthequality
over the individual d = p −n , which is a good indicator
i i i of the comparison by hand. We tested all labels that were
for the overall performance, is 0.43. This is a fundamental
classified as “wrong” in the automatic test. In this manual
improvement over the previous work [16], which achieved an
“cleanupsession”,weaddedsomelabelstothesetofaccepted
average difference of d=0.07.
labels that were synonymous to existing labels, which we
A more detailed view is given in the plot in Figure 3, missed in the original creation of the labels (e.g., we added
whichshowstheseparametersforeachindividualimage.Each “carafe” for an image showing a “pitcher”), we added some
data point indicates one image, with the positions on the x- generalized terms (e.g., “animal” instead of “tiger”), and very
axis(y-axis)representingtheempiricalvaluesforp (n ).The similar species that were easy to confuse in the images (e.g.,
i i
plot shows our main result for the full dataset. To improve “bee” and “ant”). We grouped those labels as “similar”, and
comparability with previous findings, we printed our results everything else as “wrong” as before.
as an overlay on top of the plot from previous work [16]. One
Contrarytoourexpectation,relaxedlabelingslightlywors-
might reason that the compared time frames are not the same
ens the performance. While for strict labeling we have d =
(20 days and 28 days). However, we show in Section V that
0.43, for the relaxed labeling we have d = 0.42, a small
our Mooney image priming effect declines only moderately
but noticeable difference. This might be explained by the fact
over time allowing one to consider this a fair comparison.
that some “similar” cases, in particular generalizations, are so
general that they can be guessed (e.g., 77 of the 120 images
The(diagonal)linesareintendedtohelpinthecomparison
were showing animals). Consequently, in all following studies
of the results in the layered graph. The small solid line in the
we used the strict labeling, which in addition is computable
top of the graph (p =0.07+n ) indicates the average value
i i
without human intervention.
of the difference d of the previous work [16], it corresponds
to the bold solid line in the bottom of the graph. This line
represents the average for our system (p i =0.43+n i), while V. EXPERIMENT2:LONG-TERMBEHAVIORSTUDY
the third solid line (p = 0.5 + n ) indicates the line with
i i
d =0.5. It is well-known that, in principle, priming can last over
i
very long times [13]. However, this is not known for priming
2)Response Time: A summary is given in Table II. The on Mooney images. In a second experiment, we measured the
average time to label an image is around 10 seconds with long-term effects of the priming.
a high standard deviation. (Maximum timing can be more
than 10 minutes). Median values are more robust to outliers.
A. Experimental Setup
They are closely grouped together (7.25−7.89 seconds). The
only exception can be seen in the correctly labeled primed This experiment is an extension of the first experiment.
images. These images were substantially faster (a median of It extends Experiment 1 in two aspects: first, we divided
6.30 seconds). the data gathered in Experiment 1 into two batches by the
8TABLEI. STATISTICSONTHEDURATIONANDAVERAGEEVENTPROBABILITYPEREXPERIMENT.
Duration(indays) Results
Mean SD Median Averagepi Averageni Averagedi
Experiment1 18.0 8.8 20 0.648 0.219 0.429
Experiment2
–Batch 1 8.7 2.2 9 0.726 0.226 0.500
–Batch 2 25.1 4.2 25 0.586 0.215 0.371
–Batch 3 264.3 3.8 264 0.499 0.252 0.247
Experiment3 19.9 4.7 21 0.642 0.203 0.439
TABLEII. STATISTICSONTHETIMINGFORTHELABELING
A. Experimental Setup
OPERATION,ALLVALUESAREINSECONDS.
The experimental setup was very similar to the setup for
Class Median Mean SD
our first experiment as described in Section IV-A.
Primed/correct 6.30 8.62 8.76
Primed/false 7.25 10.24 12.54 The main difference is the reduced set of images. We used
Non-primed/correct 7.89 11.17 24.83
a subset of 20 images of the original image database, the
Non-primed/false 7.30 9.55 15.38
same subset for all users, and computed a random partition of
this reduced database for each participant. We selected those
images with the best performance in the first experiment, i.e.,
time between enrollment and authentication; second, we re-
thoseimageswiththehighestvaluesd =p −n .Theselected
invited the participants of Experiment 1 after approximately i i i
imageshadvaluesd between0.79and0.57,onaverage0.643.
8.5 months again and measured the p ,n decline over time. i
i i For each user, we used 10 primed and 10 non-primed images,
Therefore, we can compare three different batches (9, 25, and
i.e., |I |=|I |=10.
264 days), details are listed in Table I. P N
There were no changes to the enrollment phase. The
B. User Participation authentication phase worked as before, but as we learned in
Experiment 1 that the strict labeling outperforms the relaxed
People from the first batch were invited to authentication
labeling, we only used the strict labeling. The goal of this
approximately 10 days after the first invitation to the enroll-
experiment was to evaluate the suitability of the authentica-
ment,peoplefromthesecondbatchafteraboutthreeandahalf
tion method, including potential cross-contamination of the
weeks. For each participant, we measured the time between
memory when several images with good priming effects were
priming and authentication. For the first batch, this difference
learned by a single user (an effect we could not study in the
has a median of 9 days, for the second batch, it has a median
first experiment). Also, the measured and presented statistics
of25days.Forthethirdbatch,themedianis264days.Further
are tailored towards this goal.
details on the participants are given in the Appendix A.
B. User Participation
C. Results
Participants were recruited via email distribution lists. We
Detailed information is provided in Figure 4 and Table I.
took several measures to avoid that participants of the first
We see a moderate decline of the priming effect over the first
or second experiment also participated in the third: we used
couple of weeks: the average value of the d is 0.500 for
i (mostly)disjointmailinglists,askedusersinthequestionnaire
the first batch and 0.371 for the second batch, both for strict
iftheyparticipatedbefore,filteredallemailsusedforthelogin
labeling. However, over longer times, the decline becomes
that have participated in the first, and placed a cookie that
much less pronounced; in fact, 264 days after the initial
allowed us to detect multiple participations. Participating in
priming we still measure an average d of 0.247.
i both studies has to be prevented as the images in the third
This is shown in more detail in Figure 4, which shows experiment are a subset from the first experiment, so being
scatter plots for p and n , separated for the first batch primed on some images in the first experiment can disturb the
i i
(top), second batch (center), and third batch (bottom). We resultsofthethirdexperiment.However,theeffectofduplicate
can additionally see that even in the third batch, there is a participants is small, as the overlap of primed images and the
substantialnumberofimageswithad greaterthan0.5(dashed 20 images in the third experiment is less than two on average.
i
line on the lower right). Again,weraffledgiftcardstothosewhofinishedbothphases.
Additionally, Table I shows the average p and n for each About half of the 70 participants in this experiment were
i i
batch. As expected, the values for n do not vary over time between20and30years,butallagegroupswererepresented.
i
(as no priming took place), but the values for p do change. About 3 out of 4 were male. Most participants were from
i
France and Germany, because of the mailing lists we used.
The results of the questionnaire are shown in Appendix B.
VI. EXPERIMENT3:MOONEYAUTHSTUDY
Based on the findings of our first study, we conducted
C. Results
a third study with the estimated parameters p and n . This
i i
experiment is designed as a realistic test of the overall perfor- The main result of this experiment is a precise estimation
mance of the authentication scheme. of the performance of the proposed authentication scheme.
91
After 9 days Previous average
p = n + 0.07
0.8
0.6
Our average
p = n + 0.5
0.4
0.2
0
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
)segami
demirp-non
rof
lebal
tcerroc(
in
pi (correct label for primed images)
1
After 25 days Previous average
p = n + 0.07
0.8
Our average
p = n + 0.371 0.6
Ideal
p = n + 0.5
0.4
0.2
0
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
)segami
demirp-non
rof
lebal
tcerroc(
in
pi (correct label for primed images)
1
After 264 days Previous average
p = n + 0.07
0.8 Our average
p = n + 0.247
0.6
Ideal
p = n + 0.5
0.4
0.2
0
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
)segami
demirp-non
rof
lebal
tcerroc(
in
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-25 -20 -15 -10 -5 0
pi (correct label for primed images)
Fig.4. Primingeffectdeclineovertime:piversusniplotforthefirstbatch
after9days(top),thesecondbatchafter25days(center),andthethirdbatch
after264days(bottom).
ytilibaborP
Measured user
Simulated user
Optimal attacker
Score
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
5 10 15 20 25 30
ytilibaborP
Measured user
Simulated user
Optimal attacker
Score
Fig. 5. Distribution of measured (bar, blue) and estimated (solid line, red)
scoresfordynamicscoring(top)andstaticscoring(bottom).
In addition, we compare the static and the dynamic scoring
strategy.
1)Performance: The complete graphs illustrating the dis-
tribution of scores are shown in Figure 5, both for dynamic
scoring (top), and static scoring (bottom). The x-axes give the
scoresassignedtoarun(roundedtointegersifnecessary),and
they-axestherelativefrequency.Thebluebarsgivetheactual
measured distribution determined in the third experiment,
while the red solid line gives the estimated distribution of
score values for a legitimate user (see Section VI-C2, using
the estimated parameters p and n from above). The green
i i
dashed line gives the distribution of an impostor using the
optimal strategy as described in Section III-F.
Wemeasuretheperformanceoftheschemeintermsofthe
false acceptance and false reject rates. The false acceptance
rate (FAR) is an indicator for the security of the protocol; it
gives the likelihood that an impostor is (falsely) classified as
a legitimate user, i.e., “accepted”. For fallback authentication
10TABLEIII. PERFORMANCEOFTHESCHEMEFORPARAMETERS TABLEIV. STATISTICSONTHEOVERALLTIMING(INSECONDS)FOR
|IP|=|IN|=10. EXPERIMENT3.
Target Score ResultingFRR Mean Median Max Min SD Var
FAR Thres. Sim. Meas.
Enroll-Tutorial 24 23 58 13 8 58
Static 0.1% 17 48.9% 76% Enroll-Priming1 113 107 170 99 15 221
scoring 0.5% 16 27.6% 67% Enroll-Survey 51 47 143 23 20 390
1.0% 15 13.0% 56% Enroll-Priming2 105 101 186 94 14 196
Total-Enroll 294 (5minutes)
Dynamic 0.1% -16 0.30% 2.86%
scoring 0.5% -16 0.30% 2.86% Auth-Tutorial 28 24 97 3 16 262
1.0% -16 0.30% 2.86% Auth-Labeling 177 163 472 70 75 5597
Total-Auth 206 (3.5minutes)
schemes (which can apply strict rate-limiting and other tech-
niques to limit the capabilities of an impostor) FARs in the approx. 18 days vs. 20 days). (ii) Being primed on several
rangeof0.01and0.001canbeconsideredacceptable(Denning images with good priming properties in parallel may cross-
et al. [16] considered a FAR of 0.005). For a given FAR, contaminate the participant’s memory and thus worsen the
we can determine the threshold that meets this FAR, which overallrecall.However,fromthisexperimentweseethateven
providesuswiththefalserejectrate(FRR),i.e.,theprobability if this effect plays a role, its influence is relatively small.
that a legitimate user is denied access to the system. Denning
We can also see that the dynamic scoring substantially
et al. [16] considered an FRR of 0.025 to be acceptable.
outperforms the static scoring. Table III lists, for several
Figure 5 and Table III depict the basic performance of the target FARs, the resulting FRRs, both for dynamic and static
proposedscheme.Wecanseethatforthedynamicscoring,the scoring. We see that for all listed FARs, the resulting FRRs
scheme achieves simulated FRRs of 0.3% for FARs between are substantially better with dynamic scoring, both for the
1% and 0.1%, and measured FRRs of 2.86%. (While it measured data and for the simulated values.
may be surprising that the measured FRR are higher than
the simulated FRRs, please note that only two participants
achievedadynamicscoreof−16,whicharesolelyresponsible VII. SECURITYANALYSIS/DISCUSSION
for the relatively high FRR.) Still, an FRR of 2.86% is pretty
In the proposed authentication scheme, the priming effect
much within the bounds of previous work.
of Mooney images is used to help users memorizing their au-
Some statistics about the duration of the experiments and thentication secret, using implicit instead of explicit memory.
the properties of the used Mooney images are summarized in However, it is important to note that, similarly to graphical
Table I. Some statistics about the duration of each phase is authenticationschemesbasedonexplicitmemory,thesecurity
given in Table IV. For example, it shows that the enrollment of this scheme relies on the subset I P only, and does not
phase took 5.0 min on average (including tutorial and ques- depend on the properties of Mooney images. In fact, our
tionnaire), and the authentication phase 3.5 min. security model considers a powerful attacker who (artificially)
knows the solution (label) for every image and still fails to
2)The Simulation: Besides the measured data from the
authenticate. (There is an indirect dependency, however, as a
user experiment, we use simulated numbers to provide addi-
weak priming effect will typically be compensated by a lower
tional insights. These simulations are based on the estimated
threshold to control the false acceptance rate and thus make
parametersp ,n determinedinthefirstexperiment,wherewe
i i attacks easier.) Once a catalog of images with good priming
selectedthe20bestimagesandusedthosep ,n .Wesimulated
i i properties is used (e.g., d >0.5, see Figure 6), the scheme is
100000 authentication attempts as follows: i
resilient to rate limited guessing attacks. Note that all users of
• Choose random subsets I and I from the available the authenticating service share the same set I of such images
P N
images. (I P,I N ⊂I). Thus, selecting the images is a one-time task.
• Simulate a user (primed on I ) logging in, based on the
P The secret used for authentication is the set of primed
collected probabilities p , n , and compute the score.
i i images I , which is a subset of all images presented to the
• Simulate an optimal adversary (as defined above), and P
user in the authentication phase I ∪I . Effectively, I is
compute the score. P N P
a randomly chosen subset, so there is no bias of user choice
An interesting observation is that the simulation based involved (in contrast to passwords and many other schemes),
on the probability values from the previous experiment is whichfacilitatesthesecurityanalysis.Theauthenticationscore
relatively accurate. We can see that the shape of the simulated computed by our scheme is not only based on the primed
distribution (red solid line) closely resembles the shape of imagestheusercanidentify,butalsoonthenon-primedimages
the measured distribution (blue bars). The only substantial that an adversary is not able to determine. As a consequence,
difference is that the distribution is shifted towards lower an adversary that can decode Mooney images without going
values, i.e., the mean changes from −8.45 to −9.6 (for the through the priming phase has no advantage for breaking the
dynamic scoring), and from 16.5 to 14.4 (for the static scor- security of the proposed scheme, if it is unknown on which
ing). In other words, the performance we measured is slightly images the victim was primed on. Also, a user connecting to
worsethanpredictedbythesimulation,whichcanhaveseveral the server under a false username and obtaining the presented
plausible reasons: (i) The time difference between enrollment images does not affect the security. To avoid intersection
and authentication for Experiment 1 (when estimating the d ) attacks,itismandatorythatthesamesetofnon-primedimages
i
was slightly shorter than for Experiment 3 (mean duration of I is presented at each login attempt.
N
11can get harder when more images are primed. An experiment
by Ludmer et al. has used Mooney images to explore memory
retrievalinthehumanbrainbypriminguserswith30randomly
selected images [28]. They have shown that if the solution to
a primed Mooney image is retained one week after priming,
it is essentially retained to the same degree also three weeks
afterward. This suggests that even when a larger sample size
of Mooney images is used retrieval of primed Mooney images
are likely to retain after longer periods of time.
VIII. CONCLUSION
Authentication schemes based on implicit memory relieve
the user of the burden of actively remembering a secret (such
as a complicated password). This paper presents a new im-
plicit memory-based authentication scheme that significantly
improves previous work by using a more efficient imprinting
mechanism, namely Mooney images, and optimizing the scor-
ing mechanism. We implemented a comprehensive prototype
and analyzed the performance and security of our proposal in
Fig.6. Exampleimageswithlongtime(264days)low(top,blue)andhigh a series of experiments. Results are promising and show that
(bottom,red)primingeffects. our scheme is particular suited for applications where timing
is not overly critical, such as fallback authentication.
Just like most other schemes, our scheme is susceptible
to phishing attacks: An attacker can query the authentication
server for the images, present them to the legitimate user,
recordthetimings,andreplaythosetotheserver.Allstandard
measures to prevent phishing attacks apply here as well.
Furthermore, an active phishing attack is required, i.e., the
attacker needs to query the server to get the correct set of
images, which may be detected on the server’s side.
While passwords can be stored (relatively) secure on the
login server using iterated password hashes and random salts
topreventguessingattacks,thisisnotfeasibleforalargerange
Fig.7. Mooneyimageandthecorrespondingoriginalimage.
of fallback authentication methods, e.g., as for knowledge
questions also approximate answers should be counted, which
typically requires storing the solution in plaintext. Similar,
there is no (obvious) way to store the secret information (i.e., ACKNOWLEDGMENT
the indices describing the set I for our scheme).
P Maximilian Golla is supported by the German Research
Guessing attacks against our scheme can be avoided just Foundation (DFG) Research Training Group GRK 1817/1.
as for other fallback authentication schemes. For example,
by putting substantial limits on the guessing rate (e.g., one
attempt per day), and a lock-out period, i.e., if account
recovery is initiated, the original owner is notified, e.g., via
REFERENCES
the stored mail, and has 24 hours to abort the recovery if
[1] A.AdamsandM.A.Sasse,“UsersAreNottheEnemy,”Communica-
it was started by somebody else. All of these measures are tionsoftheACM,vol.42,no.12,pp.40–46,Dec.1999.
implemented for other schemes as well. [2] M. D. Barense, J. K. W. Ngo, L. H. T. Hung, and M. A. Peterson,
“Interactions of Memory and Perception in Amnesia: The Figure-
We did not study interference properties, i.e., how well a GroundPerspective,”CerebralCortex,vol.22,no.11,pp.2680–2691,
user can remember a secret if the user is using the system Nov.2012.
on several servers in parallel (with different sets of primed [3] C. J. Berry, D. R. Shanks, M. Speekenbrink, and R. N. A. Henson,
images I ). However, most smaller websites use fallback “Models of Recognition, Repetition Priming, and Fluency: Exploring
P
authentication by email or use a single-sign-on solution. Thus
aNewFramework,”PsychologicalReview,vol.119,no.1,pp.40–79,
Jan.2012.
a more involved fallback authentication scheme like ours will
[4] R. Biddle, S. Chiasson, and P. Van Oorschot, “Graphical Passwords:
mostlybeofinteresttolargeemailprovidersorsocialnetwork
Learning from the First Twelve Years,” ACM Computing Surveys,
sites,andthusauserwillonlyuseveryfewparallelinstances. vol.44,no.4,pp.19:1–19:41,Aug.2012.
[5] J.Blocki,S.Komanduri,L.F.Cranor,andA.Datta,“SpacedRepetition
Our experiments are conducted on a limited set of
and Mnemonics Enable Recall of Multiple Strong Passwords,” in
20 Mooney images out of which 10 were primed. This might
SymposiumonNetworkandDistributedSystemSecurity,ser.NDSS’15.
open the question whether retrieval of primed Mooney images SanDiego,California,USA:TheInternetSociety,Feb.2015.
12[6] H. Bojinov, D. Sanchez, P. Reber, D. Boneh, and P. Lincoln, “Neu- [25] F. Imamoglu, T. Kahnt, C. Koch, and J.-D. Haynes, “Changes in
roscience Meets Cryptography: Designing Crypto Primitives Secure FunctionalConnectivitySupportConsciousObjectRecognition,”Neu-
Against Rubber Hose Attacks,” in USENIX Security Symposium, ser. roImage,vol.63,no.4,pp.1909–1917,Dec.2012.
SSYM’12. Bellevue,Washington,USA:USENIXAssociation,Aug. [26] F. Imamoglu, C. Koch, and J.-D. Haynes, “MoonBase: Generating a
2012,pp.129–141. Database of Two-Tone Mooney Images,” Journal of Vision, vol. 13,
[7] J. Bonneau, E. Bursztein, I. Caron, R. Jackson, and M. Williamson, no.9,pp.50–50,Jul.2013.
“Secrets, Lies, and Account Recovery: Lessons from the Use of [27] J. M. Kizilirmak, J. Galvao Gomes da Silva, F. Imamoglu, and
PersonalKnowledgeQuestionsatGoogle,”inInternationalWorldWide A. Richardson-Klavehn, “Generation and the subjective feeling of
Web Conference, ser. WWW ’15. Florence, Italy: ACM, May 2015, “aha!”areindependentlyrelatedtolearningfrominsight,”Psychologi-
pp.141–150. calResearch,vol.80,no.6,pp.1059–1074,Aug.2016.
[8] J.Bonneau,C.Herley,P.C.vanOorschot,andF.Stajano,“TheQuestto [28] R.Ludmer,Y.Dudai,andN.Rubin,“UncoveringCamouflage:Amyg-
ReplacePasswords:AFrameworkforComparativeEvaluationofWeb dala Activation Predicts Long-Term Memory of Induced Perceptual
Authentication Schemes,” in IEEE Security and Privacy, ser. SP ’12. Insight,”Neuron,vol.69,no.5,pp.1002–1014,Mar.2011.
SanJose,CA,USA:IEEE,May2012,pp.553–567.
[29] D.E.MeyerandR.W.Schvaneveldt,“FacilitationinRecognizingPairs
[9] J.Bonneau,M.Just,andG.Matthews,“What’sinaName?Evaluating of Words: Evidence of a Dependence Between Retrieval Operations,”
Statistical Attacks on Personal Knowledge Questions,” in Financial JournalofExperimentalPsychology,vol.90,no.2,pp.227–234,Oct.
CryptographyandDataSecurity,ser.FC’10. Tenerife,CanaryIslands, 1971.
Spain:Springer,Jan.2010,pp.98–113. [30] D. B. Mitchell, A. S. Brown, and D. R. Murphy, “Dissociations
[10] J. Bonneau and S. Preibusch, “The Password Thicket: Technical and BetweenProceduralandEpisodicMemory:EffectsofTimeandAging,”
Market Failures in Human Authentication on the Web,” in Workshop PsychologyandAging,vol.5,no.2,pp.264–276,Jun.1990.
ontheEconomicsofInformationSecurity,ser.WEIS’10,Cambridge, [31] C. M. Mooney, “Age in the Development of Closure Ability in
Massachusetts,USA,Jun.2010. Children,”CanadianJournalofPsychology,vol.11,no.4,pp.219–226,
[11] J. Bonneau and S. Schechter, “Towards Reliable Storage of 56-bit Dec.1957.
Secrets in Human Memory,” in USENIX Security Symposium, ser. [32] R.Nieva,“YahooWantstoKillPasswords,”Oct.2015,http://www.cnet.
SSYM’14. SanDiego,California,USA:USENIXAssociation,Aug. com/news/yahoo-wants-to-kill-passwords-with-revamped-mail-app/,
2014,pp.607–623. asofDecember20,2016.
[12] J.Brainard,A.Juels,R.L.Rivest,M.Szydlo,andM.Yung,“Fourth- [33] N.Otsu,“AThresholdSelectionMethodfromGray-LevelHistograms,”
FactorAuthentication:SomebodyYouKnow,”inACMConferenceon IEEETransactionsonSystems,Man,andCybernetics,vol.9,no.1,pp.
Computer and Communications Security, ser. CCS ’06. Alexandria, 62–66,Jan.1979.
Virginia,USA:ACM,Nov.2006,pp.168–178. [34] Real User Corporation, “The Science Behind Passfaces,” Jun. 2004,
[13] C.B.Cave,“VeryLong-LastingPriminginPictureNaming,”Psycho- http://www.realuser.com/published/ScienceBehindPassfaces.pdf, as of
logicalScience,vol.8,no.4,pp.322–325,Jul.1997. December20,2016.
[14] D.Davis,F.Monrose,andM.K.Reiter,“OnUserChoiceinGraphical [35] K. Renaud and M. Just, “Pictures or Questions? Examining User
PasswordSchemes,”inUSENIXSecuritySymposium,ser.SSYM’04. Responses to Association-Based Authentication,” in BCS Conference
SanDiego,California,USA:USENIXAssociation,Aug.2004,pp.151– on Human-Computer Interaction, ser. HCI ’10. Dundee, UK: ACM
164. Press,Sep.2010,pp.98–107.
[15] J.Deng,W.Dong,R.Socher,L.-J.Li,K.Li,andL.Fei-Fei,“ImageNet: [36] M.D.Rugg,R.E.Mark,P.Walla,A.M.Schloerscheidt,C.S.Birch,
A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database,” in IEEE Conference on and K. Allan, “Dissociation of the Neural Correlates of Implicit and
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, ser. CVPR ’09. Miami, ExplicitMemory,”Nature,vol.392,no.6676,pp.595–598,Apr.1998.
Florida,USA:IEEE,Jun.2009,pp.248–255. [37] D.L.SchacterandR.D.Badgaiyan,“NeuroimagingofPriming:New
[16] T.Denning,K.Bowers,M.vanDijk,andA.Juels,“ExploringImplicit Perspectives on Implicit and Explicit Memory,” Current Directions in
MemoryforPainlessPasswordRecovery,”inACMSIGCHIConference PsychologicalScience,vol.10,no.1,pp.1–4,Feb.2001.
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’11. Vancouver, [38] S.Schechter,A.J.B.Brush,andS.Egelman,“It’sNoSecret.Measuring
BritishColumbia,Canada:ACM,May2011,pp.2615–2618. theSecurityandReliabilityofAuthenticationvia“Secret”Questions,”
inIEEESymposiumonSecurityandPrivacy,ser.SP’09. SanJose,
[17] R. J. Dolan, G. R. Fink, E. Rolls, M. Booth, A. Holmes, R. S.
California,USA:IEEE,May2009,pp.375–390.
Frackowiak,andK.J.Friston,“HowtheBrainLearnstoSeeObjects
andFacesinanImpoverishedContext,”Nature,vol.389,no.6651,pp. [39] S.Schechter,S.Egelman,andR.W.Reeder,“It’sNotWhatYouKnow,
596–599,Oct.1997. ButWhoYouKnow:ASocialApproachtoLast-ResortAuthentication,”
inSIGCHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems,ser.
[18] S. L. Garfinkel, “Email-Based Identification and Authentication: An
CHI’09. Boston,USA:ACMPress,Apr.2009,pp.1983–1992.
AlternativetoPKI?”IEEESecurityandPrivacy,vol.1,no.6,pp.20–
26,Dec.2003. [40] C. E. Shannon, “A Mathematical Theory of Communication,” Bell
SystemTechnicalJournal,vol.27,no.3,pp.379–423,Jul.1948.
[19] M. S. Gazzaniga, Cognitive Neuroscience: The Biology of the Mind,
4thed. NewYork,NY,USA:W.W.Norton&Company,Inc,2013. [41] C.Tallon-Baudry,O.Bertrand,C.Delpuech,andJ.Permier,“Oscilla-
toryGamma-Band(30-70Hz)ActivityInducedbyaVisualSearchTask
[20] M.A.Gluck,LearningandMemory:FromBraintoBehavior,2nded. inHumans,”TheJournalofNeuroscience,vol.17,no.2,pp.722–734,
NewYork,NY,USA:WorthPublishers,2014.
Jan.1997.
[21] V.GriffithandM.Jakobsson,“Messin’withTexas:DerivingMother’s [42] N.B.Turk-Browne,D.-J.Yi,andM.M.Chun,“LinkingImplicitand
Maiden Names Using Public Records,” in Conference on Applied ExplicitMemory:CommonEncodingFactorsandSharedRepresenta-
CryptographyandNetworkSecurity,ser.ACNS’05. NewYork,NY, tions,”Neuron,vol.49,no.6,pp.917–927,Mar.2006.
USA:Springer,Mar.2005,pp.91–103.
[43] D.WeinshallandS.Kirkpatrick,“PasswordsYou’llNeverForget,But
[22] E.Hayashi,R.Dhamija,N.Christin,andA.Perrig,“UseYourIllusion: Can’tRecall,”inACMSIGCHIExtendedAbstractsonHumanFactors
Secure Authentication Usable Anywhere,” in USENIX Symposium on in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’04. Vienna, Austria: ACM, Apr.
UsablePrivacyandSecurity,ser.SOUPS’08. Pittsburgh,PA,USA: 2004,pp.1399–1402.
ACM,Jul.2008,pp.35–45.
[44] M. Wilson, “MRC Psycholinguistic Database: Machine-Usable Dic-
[23] A. Hern, “Google Aims to Kill Passwords,” May 2016, https://www. tionary, Version 2.00,” Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, &
theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/24/google-passwords-android, Computers,vol.20,no.1,pp.6–10,Jan.1988.
asofDecember20,2016.
[45] M.ZviranandW.J.Haga,“AComparisonofPasswordTechniquesfor
[24] P.-J.Hsieh,E.Vul,andN.Kanwisher,“RecognitionAlterstheSpatial MultilevelAuthenticationMechanisms,”TheComputerJournal,vol.36,
Pattern of fMRI Activation in Early Retinotopic Cortex,” Journal of no.3,pp.227–237,Mar.1993.
Neurophysiology,vol.103,no.3,pp.1501–1507,Jan.2010.
13APPENDIXA
DETAILSOFTHEPRE-STUDY(EXPERIMENT1)ANDTHELONG-TERMSTUDY(EXPERIMENT2)
(9days) (25days) (264days)
1stbatch 2ndbatch 3rdbatch
No. Percent No. Percent No. Percent
Age 97 100.0% 129 100.0% 124 100.0%
20-30 61 62.9% 66 51.2% 69 55.6%
31-40 27 27.8% 40 31.0% 38 30.6%
41-49 6 6.2% 14 10.9% 12 9.7%
50+ 3 3.1% 9 7.0% 5 4.0%
Gender 97 100.0% 129 100.0% 124 100.0%
male 81 83.5% 101 78.3% 97 78.2%
female 16 16.5% 27 20.9% 27 21.8%
other - - 1 0.8% - -
Country 97 100.0% 129 100.0% 124 100.0%
France 40 41.2% 55 42.6% 54 43.5%
Germany 41 42.3% 44 34.1% 45 36.3%
other 16 16.5% 30 23.3% 25 20.2%
NativeEnglishspeaker 97 100.0% 129 100.0% 124 100.0%
Yes 6 6.2% 4 3.1% 7 5.6%
No 91 93.8% 125 96.9% 117 94.4%
Profession 97 100.0% 129 100.0% 124 100.0%
Administration 4 4.1% 3 2.3% 4 3.2%
Arts - - - - - -
Engineering 38 39.2% 55 42.6% 52 41.9%
Humanities - - 2 1.6% - -
Lifescience 1 1.0% 1 0.8% 1 0.8%
Science 53 54.6% 66 51.2% 65 52.4%
other 1 1.0% 2 1.6% 2 1.6%
HeardofMooneyimages 97 100.0% 129 100.0% 124 100.0%
Workedwithbefore - - - - - -
Heardofbefore 10 10.3% 11 8.5% 8 6.5%
none 87 89.7% 118 91.5% 116 93.5%
Passwordsareeasytoremember 97 100.0% 129 100.0% 124 100.0%
Stronglyagree 4 4.1% 3 2.3% 4 3.2%
Agree 30 30.9% 32 24.8% 36 29.0%
Neitheragreenordisagree 33 34.0% 46 35.7% 38 30.6%
Disagree 27 27.8% 39 30.2% 39 31.5%
Stronglydisagree 3 3.1% 9 7.0% 7 5.6%
Passwordsaresecure 97 100.0% 129 100.0% 124 100.0%
Stronglyagree 2 2.1% 2 1.6% 2 1.6%
Agree 29 29.9% 35 27.1% 37 29.8%
Neitheragreenordisagree 36 37.1% 38 29.5% 37 29.8%
Disagree 25 25.8% 42 32.6% 38 30.6%
Stronglydisagree 5 5.2% 12 9.3% 10 8.1%
Mooneyimagesareinterestingtoworkwith 96 100.0% 129 100.0% 124 100.0%
Stronglyagree 8 8.3% 5 3.9% 9 7.3%
Agree 46 47.9% 70 54.3% 57 46.0%
Neitheragreenordisagree 36 37.5% 39 30.2% 48 38.7%
Disagree 6 6.3% 13 10.1% 9 7.3%
Stronglydisagree - - 2 1.6% 1 0.8%
UsingMooneyimagesisfunny 97 100.0% 129 100.0% 124 100.0%
Stronglyagree 6 6.2% 7 5.4% 7 5.6%
Agree 37 38.1% 52 40.3% 42 33.9%
Neitheragreenordisagree 40 41.2% 56 43.4% 59 47.6%
Disagree 13 13.4% 10 7.8% 14 11.3%
Stronglydisagree 1 1.0% 4 3.1% 2 1.6%
14APPENDIXB
DETAILSOFTHEFINALSTUDY(EXPERIMENT3)
(21days)
No. Percent
Age 70 100.0%
20-29 39 55.7%
30-39 22 31.4%
40-49 6 8.6%
50-59 2 2.9%
60+ 1 1.4%
Gender 70 100.0%
male 54 77.1%
female 15 21.4%
other 1 1.4%
Nationality 70 100.0%
France 29 41.4%
Germany 12 17.1%
USA 9 12.9%
other 20 28.6%
Countryyoucompletingthisin 70 100.0%
France 37 52.9%
USA 16 22.9%
Germany 13 18.6%
other 4 5.7%
NativeEnglishspeaker 70 100.0%
Yes 10 14.3%
No 60 85.7%
Profession 70 100.0%
Arts 2 2.9%
Business 2 2.9%
Engineering 24 34.3%
Humanities 1 1.4%
Lifescience 6 8.6%
Science 35 50.0%
other - -
HeardofMooneyimages 70 100.0%
Workedwithbefore 3 4.3%
Heardofbefore 18 25.7%
none 49 70.0%
Mooneyimagesareeasytoremember 70 100.0%
Stronglyagree 1 1.4%
Agree 25 35.7%
Neitheragreenordisagree 35 50.0%
Disagree 9 12.9%
Stronglydisagree - -
15