Attack Detection Methods for All-Optical Networks
Muriel Médard, Douglas Marquis, and Stephen R. Chinn
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Lincoln Laboratory
244 Wood Street, Lexington, Massachusetts 02173-9108
Telephone: (781) 981-7650 Fax: (781) 981-4129 Internet: medard@ll.mit.edu, marquis@ll.mit.edu, chinn@ll.mit.edu
Abstract considered shown. The centerpiece of the paper is then
presented, a review of existing diagnostic and attack
This paper focuses on theoretical methods for
detection mechanisms, followed by a description of a
detecting intentional attacks upon the infrastructure of
new method which can more reliably detect attacks in an
an all-optical network. Applications of existing methods
AON. Finally, a discussion of limitations and unsolved
used in traditional networks, as well as discussion of a
problems is provided.
new method for detecting attacks are presented.
Advantages and limitations of both classes of methods
are considered. 2. All-Optical Network Overview
An all-optical network (AON) is a network that uses
lightwave communication exclusively within the
network. More precisely, in an AON all network-to-
1. Introduction network interfaces are based on optical transmission, all
All-optical networks (AONs) are a viable technology user-to-network interfaces use optical transmission on
for future telecommunication and data networks, but the network side of the interface, and all switching and
their intrinsic security differences with respect to routing within AON network nodes is performed
existing electro-optic and electronic networks have only optically. The principal advantage of maintaining an
recently received attention [1,2]. This work concentrates optical network core in comparison to using electro-optic
on understanding a portion of the security framework for components at nodes or in transmission systems is higher
AONs – the study of methods to detect an attack upon an bandwidth: optical bandwidths are generally one
AON. The detection study is broken into two parts: an thousand fold those of electronic bandwidths, and
evaluation of the ability of existing fault detection and avoiding optical/electronic/optical conversions therefore
diagnostic equipment to detect attacks on AONs, and promises roughly one thousand times greater data rates
consideration of a new method for detecting certain than possible with electro-optic networks. Transparency
attacks. The consideration of all possible attacks is is an optical network feature that allows routing and
beyond the scope of this paper, but three important switching of data within the network without
attack classes are considered. The results will suggest interpretation or regeneration of the individual data
that while existing methods can detect certain very streams. While transparency has many desirable features
simple attacks, many other simple attacks (and a large (e.g. terminal upgrades do not require network
number of advanced attacks) cannot be addressed using upgrades), it has important ramifications for security.
current methods. A particularly important reason for the
Contemporary AONs are still largely in the research
limitations of current methods is transparency, a feature
arena, though commercial providers are beginning to
of some AONs that allows signals to traverse nodes provide limited AON functions in their networks. The
independently of signal modulation, data rate, and other research AONs are divided into two types: wavelength
particular characteristics. The inability of an AON node division multiplexed (WDM), which separate multiple
to interpret the data makes the use of link-by-link channels of traffic each onto its own wavelength, and
forward error correction coding protection mechanisms, time-division multiplexed (TDM), which separate
which are today’s de facto standard, insufficient by multiple channels of traffic each into its own time slot.
themselves for detecting attacks in AONs. TDM networks to date [3] have often employed soliton
transmission and other features that will likely require
This paper first provides an overview of AON
further development to reach commercial maturity.
architecture and some results to date. The vulnerabilities
Therefore, this paper concentrates on WDM AONs.
of AONs are then reviewed, and the attacks that will be
1 of 15Existing AONs are generally architected as circuit- converting them to electronic signals. One artifact of the
switched networks. Circuit-switched networks are amplification is amplified spontaneous emission (ASE)
compatible with (1) existing telecommunication noise, which is added to the output of a signal exiting the
installations (long haul), (2) ATM networks, and amplifier.
(3) some multiplexing equipment often used with
Each of these components is susceptible to some form
Internet networks. Fully operational packet-switched
of attack. The description follows in the sections below.
AONs have not been implemented in part owing to the
It is worth noting that although AONs are not generally
lack of a desirable optical memory. AON architecture
commercial products today, each of the above
can generally be divided into optical terminals (which
components is commercially available from multiple
are the user-network interface), network nodes (which
manufacturers. Some of these components (notably
switch, route, and sometimes perform mux/demux), and
Erbium Doped Fiber Amplifiers) are already deployed in
optically amplified fiber optic links. A separate control
operational telecommunication backbone networks.
network (not always all-optical) is usually used for
signaling purposes. The switching and routing may be The above components have been integrated into
done via mechanical switches, opto-electronic switches, testbeds to show the operations and limitations of AONs.
passive optical routers, or splitter/combiners. Common AON demonstrations to-date have taken place mostly in
Table 1: Common AON Components
Component Use Example
Combiner Combine optical signals from N fibers to Star Coupler
1 fiber
Splitter Split signal from 1 fiber to N fibers Star Coupler
Demultiplexer Separate multiple signals on one fiber Waveguide Grating
each onto its own fiber Router
Multiplexer Combine individual signals from multiple Waveguide Grating
fibers onto one fiber Router
Optical Increases the signal strength (amplitude) Erbium Doped Fiber
Amplifier of an input signal. Amplifier (EDFA)
Spatial Switch Let pass or dump a particular signal, or LiNbO Switch
3
switch it between fibers
Lasers Transmit a Signal Many
Opt Receivers Receive a Signal PINFET, Avalanche
Photo-diodes
Fiber Cable Transport Many
topologies include star, ring, and mesh. Some of the government-funded testbeds or testbeds funded by
architectures allow a hybrid mixture of topologies. consortia. In the United States, there are consortia
involving academia, industry, and government. In
Although there are a large number of possible
particular, the AON [4], MONET [5], and NTONC [6]
architectures, most contemporary WDM AONs are built
consortia have multiple participating organizations and
using a combination of a relatively small set of
have all developed testbeds. In addition, the European
components. This is very fortunate for this security
RACE consortium [7], and the Japanese efforts [8] have
study, because an understanding of the security
also developed testbeds. Various testbeds and laboratory
properties of each component provides a reasonable
experiments have demonstrated aggregate throughputs of
foundation for predicting network vulnerabilities and
over 1 Tbit/s [9]. The traffic carried has consisted of
suggesting robust architectures. The most commonly
ATM, IP, SONET, Frame Relay, and digitized video.
used AON components are shown in Table 1.
The remainder of the paper does not consider
A particularly important component is the optical
authentication and cryptographic techniques. There are
amplifier. Amplifiers are used in both nodes and links of
many interesting cryptographic issues associated with
AONs. The amplifier works by using a pump laser and a
AONs and several methods have been proposed for
gain medium to amplify optical signals without
implementing cryptography in optical communications
2 of 15[10], [11], [12]. However, in order to determine what amounts of data (e.g. number of 'bits in flight') on a
the cryptographic needs of an AON might be, it is particular fiber path for AONs over electro-optic
important to first establish certain characteristics of the networks means more data is vulnerable to any particular
network. In particular, it is important to determine how attack than would be in a lower rate network. To
immune the signals are to eavesdropping. Determining illustrate the effect, consider applying to AONs one
the reliability of the network is also crucial, since means of checking for attacks in existing networks -
without satisfactory QoS guarantees, cryptographic using transport packet verification at the network
issues may be moot. There is a need to address service perimeter. The check on the data may be end-to-end
disruption, which is important to networks used for decoding as in some existing electronic networks (e.g.
national security purposes, and increasingly important to frame relay), or by extension to AONs, be a power test
broader-use networks such as the Internet [13]. on the received signal as proposed in [14]. In a Tbit/s
optical network, perimeter detection of attack combined
with a total network path delay on the order of
3. Vulnerabilities of All-Optical
milliseconds will result in Gbits of data having been
Networks
attacked. Note that, because of transparency, it will not
This section concentrates on the vulnerabilities of always be possible to place decoding and checking
AONs in order to understand and categorize an important mechanism at several locations throughout an AON to
and simple set of possible attacks upon these networks. overcome the latency problem.
The attacks have specific goals as will be discussed.
High AON data rates are not the only reason why
identification of attacks should take place at all possible
3.1. Motivation attack locations. An incorrect diagnostic may be given
by the network management system. An example is
The components of AONs discussed in section 2 are
shown in Figure 1. Channel 1 attacks channel 2 via
each vulnerable to some form of denial of service or
crosstalk (in-band jamming). The output of the switch is
eavesdropping-type attack. The attack methods we are
a channel with excessive power that causes a gain
most concerned with are jamming – the overpowering of
competition attack on channel 3 at the amplifier. If the
legitimate network signals with attack signals – which
amplifier detects the attack of channel 2 on channel 3,
can be used to degrade or deny service, and the
but the switch does not detect the attack of channel 1 on
exploitation of device crosstalk. Device crosstalk exists
channel 2, the network management system may decided
within most contemporary optical devices, and is the
to disconnect channel 2. Indeed, the only information
phenomenon where signals from one portion of the
available to the network management system is that
optical device leak into another portion of the device.
channel 2 is nefarious at the amplifier, even though
Crosstalk can be used for service denial or
channel 1 is the offending channel.
eavesdropping attacks. Note that we have not separated
signal interception from traffic analysis, instead lumping
Optical Amplifier
both under the eavesdropping heading – for this analysis
no distinction is necessary. What is necessary is an
understanding that detection of attacks in all-optical
networks is somewhat different that for electro-optic or Channel 3
electronic networks.
Channel 2
There are many reasons for which, in AONs,
(1) attacks must be detected and identified at all points in Switch
the network where attacks may occur, and (2) the speed
of attack detection should be commensurate with the
data transmission rate of the network. The high data Channel 1
rates of AONs have an important consequence for attack
detection, essentially because large amounts of data can
be affected in a short time. When a fixed duration attack Figure 1: Example Attack
disrupts service, the amount of data affected is linearly
proportional to the data rate. Similarly, in an Finally, depending on the algorithms that are used for
eavesdropping attack, the amount of data compromised recovery from attack, it is often necessary to be able to
is linearly proportional to the data rate. The larger identify an attack and differentiate it from a failure. For
3 of 15instance, suppose in Figure 1 that channel 2 suffers from needs a method of attack. To confine the discussion,
a gain competition attack from channel 1 at an amplifier three particular attacks are considered. They are chosen
which channels 1 and 2 share. A diagnostic of failure due because they are either very easy to realize, particularly
to insufficient output power from channel 1 might cause effective against network services, or have an
the network management system to reroute channels 1 intrinsically different effect than a similar attack against
and 2 onto some alternate amplifier(s), which may in a traditional network. The methods are shown in Table
turn be attacked by channel 1. 2.
These methods are not the only methods available to
3.2. Attack Types and Methods an attacker to realize one of the two attack types.
However, these methods are fairly easy to realize using
Attacks upon a network can be broadly categorized
commercially available technology, and could cause
into six areas based on the goal of the attacker:
major problems in an unsecured AON. Section 3.3 gives
(1) traffic analysis, (2) eavesdropping, (3) data delay,
examples from each attack method in Table 2.
(4) service denial, (5) QoS degradation, (6) spoofing. It
is advantageous for the purposes of this work to reduce There are many other possible ways to divide the
the scope of the attack methods under consideration as attack taxonomy problem. For instance, each attack can
follows: (1) Traffic analysis and eavesdropping have be categorized by its resources (passive, active); its
similar characteristics, they may be lumped together; means of attack (transmission/reception, protocol,
optical networks are somewhat immune to delay attacks control system); the target (specific users or
owing to the lack of optical memory, and delay attacks network/subnetwork); the intended effect (traffic analysis
are therefore ignored, (2) Spoofing is an attack which or eavesdropping or service disruption); the location of
may be defended using cryptographic methods alone, the attack (terminal, node, link, multiple locations), and
and it is therefore not considered here, (3) Service denial the attacker’s willingness to be discovered (covert,
is QoS degradation taken to the limit, therefore both can subtle, overt). All combinations of the above list would
be considered under the label ‘service disruption’. yield 576 possible attack domains, not all of which are
plausible or will be considered herein.
The resulting attack types are reduced to two:
eavesdropping & traffic analysis (hereafter
‘eavesdropping’), and service disruption. A longer 3.3. Component Vulnerabilities
attack type list might include areas such as non-
Each of the components of an AON listed in Table 1 is
repudiation (and others), but such attacks are generally
vulnerable to an attack from Table 2. Three examples
aimed at network protocols, management systems, or
summarize the possibilities.
operational methods rather than at network
infrastructures – infrastructures are our primary concern Consider first an in-band jammer using a single high-
in this work. Although eavesdropping and traffic power transmitter that is injected into a link. The attack
analysis generally have vastly different effects upon the can destroy a signal on that link — not unlike a
legitimate use of the network, this analysis does not traditional network. But in an AON, that attack can
require a distinction. At higher network protocol layers, degrade signals on that link and on other network links
the distinction becomes more important, but at the attached to that node. This is due to transparency, which
physical layer, any possible leaking away of legitimate lets signals flow through nodes without regenerating
signals is conceptually the same for the purposes of this them.
analysis.
To implement one of the two attack types, an attacker
Table 2: AON Attack Methods
Attack Method Realizes Means
In-Band Jamming Service Disruption An attacker injects a signal designed to reduce the ability of the
receiver to interpret correctly the transmitted data
Out-of-Band Service Disruption An attacker reduces communication signal component by exploiting
Jamming leaky components or cross-modulation effects
Unauthorized Eavesdropping An attacker listens to the crosstalk leaking from an adjacent signal
Observation through a shared resource in order to gain information from the
adjacent signal
4 of 15communication signals, and will provide gain to each
N signal indiscriminately from a finite supply of gain
(specifically, its common wavelength-dependent gain-
1
medium inversion). Those photons the amplifier
provides to the attack signal both rob gain available to
N 5 N
the communication signal, and increase the power of the
Attack
2 attack signal downstream, allowing it to propagate
through transparent nodes. Threshold in-band power
detection at the receiver, the current accepted means of
attack detection, would not necessarily detect jamming,
N N because the average received in-band power could be
4 3
made to decrease (not increase) or remain constant
during the attack. This kind of attack could be mounted
Figure 2: Network Attack Means against an optical amplifier within a node or within an
amplified fiber link.
Figure 2 shows a single point attack on the center link EDFAs have different temporal behavior than
(2,5), which affects not only the node which the attack conventional electronic amplifiers. The optical gain
signal first reaches (node #2), but the two other nodes results from excitation of the erbium ions by absorption
with the first-attacked node connects (node #1 & node of a steady-state optical pump. The dynamics of the
#3). The components from Table 1 that could be resulting excitation can be strongly affected by the
exploited are any of combiners, multiplexers, or optical signals being amplified particularly when they become
amplifiers. intense enough to saturate the gain by extracting energy
from the erbium excitation.
Single-point threshold in-band power detection would
not necessarily suggest the correct location for the point If the amplified signals vary rapidly compared to
of the attack. For instance, power detection at node #1 characteristic de-excitation times of the erbium ions (due
might wrongly ascribe the problem to an attack located to optical emission), then the erbium excitation varies
at link (1,2). This attack can be made cheap, subtle, and with a slower time average of the optical signals. The
can be specifically targeted at individual users. gain is essentially constant as seen by the large-
bandwidth signals being amplified. However, if there
are long transients in the input signals or their envelopes,
these transients can cause large transient changes in the
erbium excitation, and the resulting gain. Even after the
optical transients end, the gain changes may persist for
much longer times (typically, 10’s of microseconds or
longer). This effect may provide a method for attacking
an EDFA with an optical signal, in particular allowing a
low duty cycle attack to be very effective at degrading or
l denying service.
The third attack is a realization of unauthorized
observation (eavesdropping), the collection of signals by
A second attack is to employ out-of-band jamming to an attacker for whom they were not intended.
exploit crosstalk in optical components. Specifically, Eavesdropping is possible at several points within the
because of cross-gain modulation effects within an network — two examples are considered. The first
optical amplifier, jamming is possible by using an out- example exploits component crosstalk — contemporary
of-band high-power signal. This effect is very different demultiplexers within network nodes exhibit crosstalk
from the gain compression effects found in electronic levels of between 0.03% to 1.0%. The demultiplexer is
amplifiers. The attacker would inject a signal at a meant to separate each individual wavelength received
different wavelength from the communication bands, but from a single fiber onto separate physical paths, but the
within the amplifier passband, as shown in Figure 3. The crosstalk allows a little of each wavelength to leak onto
attack can work because the amplifier cannot distinguish the wrong path. That signal may have enough fidelity to
between attack signals and legitimate network permit an attacker to detect its presence, and possibly to
5 of 15
rewoP
Attacker
Gain
Robbed
Figure 3: EDFA Attackrecover a portion of the data from the stream. Within management systems [15], [16], [17], [18]; further
electronic or electro-optic regenerated networks, consideration of detection of attacks upon network
crosstalk levels are usually significantly lower than management systems is beyond the scope of this paper.
0.03%, making eavesdropping via crosstalk less In general, the security services considered for higher
threatening. The second example exploits an optical layers of electronic packet networks [19] will not on
amplifier. The gain provided by an EDFA to an their own be directly applicable to AONs. Some of these
individual channel is a function of the sum of the levels services will work well in conjunction with security
of all signals passing through the amplifier. This means systems operating at the physical layer.
that copropagating signals experience a slight amplitude
modulation based on the presence or absence of signal
4. Existing Methods for Attack
on adjacent channels. An attacker can exploit that slight
Detection
modulation to recover a portion of the intended signal on
an adjacent channel. The optical amplifier attack can be
effected in electro-optic, or all-optical networks. 4.1. A Categorization of Known Attack
Detection Methods
3.4. Architectural Implications This section examines the applicability of current
automatic diagnostic and supervisory techniques to
Section 3.3 showed the vulnerability of some
certain broad classes of attacks upon AONs. The
components — the individual methods of attacking
supervisory techniques considered may be broadly
portions of an AON infrastructure. When considering
arranged in two categories: (1) Methods which perform
combination attacks and when analyzing attack detection
statistical analysis of the communications data (e.g.
algorithms, it is important to understand the broader
wideband power detection and optical spectrum
impact of individual attacks upon the optical network
analyzers); and (2) methods which measure a signal
architecture and services it provides.
devoted to diagnostic purposes (e.g. pilot tones and
Topology is an important architectural consideration, optical time domain reflectometers).
and different topologies have different security
Each is overviewed by type of attack and applicability
properties. Ring topologies allow attacks to be relatively
for each of the three attack types described above.
easily localized, because of the structured
interconnectivity of nodes. Rings also allow easy
rerouting because there is only one logical link upon 4.1.1. Wideband Power Detection Methods
which traffic can be rerouted when an attack is detected.
Power detection describes the measurement of
However, attacks on ring networks can generally require
received optical power over a wide bandwidth. It may
more work to restore services because all of the traffic
be used to record a change in power with respect to the
on each ring is co-routed. The richer node
expected value. Because measured power is compared
interconnectivity of mesh topologies generally makes
against an expected value, a slight decrease in power
service restoration easier (though not in every
may take a long time to detect. If the law of large
comparison). However, the rich interconnectivity means
numbers is used in the statistical analysis, then a very
that attacks aimed at transparent components are
long averaging time may be necessary to establish with
generally harder to detect. Star topologies make attack
reasonable certitude that a deviation of the sample mean
detection nominally easier than other topologies, because
from the statistical mean was statistically significant.
any propagating attacks are commonly received at many
Small but detectable changes in received power may not
stations. However, compromise of the star network hub
be attributable to attacks (e.g. component aging, fiber
necessarily disrupts all network services. It should be
repairs, etc.) and may not adversely affect the
clear from the foregoing that there is no one preferred
communication signals. Therefore, most schemes use
topology to ensure the “best” network security, but also
threshold power detection techniques with the selected
that the differences in vulnerabilities mean that each
thresholds matched to the level at which communication
topology provides its own intrinsic security advantages.
services will be degraded.
Most of the detection methods suggested in the following
section will support any topology, though they’ll provide
different defense levels based on the underlying topology 4.1.2. Optical Spectral Analysis Methods
and the type of network management system used.
Optical spectral analyzers (OSAs), as their name
There has been work in the area of WDM AON network
indicates, measure the spectrum of an optical signal.
6 of 15There are many implementations of OSAs [20]. OSAs and the tone amplitude is below 10 percent of the data
may give a more detailed diagnostic than simple power level.
integration. They may be able to detect a change in
Cross-gain modulation among pilot tones at EDFAs
spectrum shape, even if that change in shape does not
has also shown that the pilot tone frequencies should
entail a change in power over the whole channel. For
remain between 10 and 100 kHz. Since these results
instance, two signals can have the same total power but
were obtained by experimental testing, it is not clear how
different spectra. An OSA will be able to distinguish
they apply to different data rates, modulation formats,
between the two signals whereas a power integrator over
etc. Moreover, there are issues associated with pilot
the whole channel will not. Although OSAs may provide
tones traversing wavelength changers.
more information than power detectors, they still rely on
statistical comparisons between sample averages and
statistical averages. Arguments based on some law of 4.1.4. Optical Time Domain Reflectometry Methods
large numbers will still imply that infrequent
Optical time domain reflectometers (OTDRs) are a
degradations of the signal will not be detected or will be
special application of pilot tones. Rather than analyze a
detected only after a long time. Although providing
pilot tone at the point where a communication signal is
more information than wideband power detection
received, the pilot tone’s echo is analyzed. Because of
methods, optical spectral analysis methods generally
the widespread use of OTDRs and the fact that they
require some averaging effects which make them slower
analyze the reflection of the pilot tone rather than the
than some other detection methods.
pilot tone itself, OTDRs merit to be considered by
themselves, although they share many features with pilot
4.1.3. Pilot Tone Methods tones. OTDRs are generally used to diagnose faults,
bends and losses in the fiber [25]. Thus, they would
Pilot tones are signals that travel along the same links
usually be better adapted to detecting attacks that
and nodes as the communications data but which are
involve fiber tampering. However, since they operate by
distinguishable from that data. Their purpose is to detect
reflecting a signal back through the fiber, they may also
transmission disruptions. Pilot tones are often at different
provide information about other attacks that are taking
carrier frequencies than the transmitted signal, but they
place. Note that the signal used for reflectometry may
might also be distinguished from the communications
also be used as a supervisory signal [26], [27] and
payload by certain time slots (in a TDMA system) or
therefore may share the uses discussed in the section on
certain codes (in a CDMA system). Pilot signals are
pilot tones. The probe signal may also, for certain
usually located at carrier frequencies within or between
unmodulated or very simply modulated probe signals, be
WDM channels as well as outside the transmission band.
subject to jamming in the same way as pilot tones. Note
If the pilot tones are present, in frequency, in the close
that the use of optical isolators in conjunction with
vicinity of the communications transmissions, they are
optical amplifiers is common, and may require OTDRs
usually referred to as subcarrier multiplexed (SCM)
at every amplifier.
signals. Such SCM signals allow the transmission of
network signaling or of a pilot tone at the same carrier
wavelength as the payload signal [21]. The tone may be 4.2. Existing Methods Applied to Defend
something other than a static tone. For instance, it may Against an In-band Jamming Attack
be dynamically tunable [22] to transmit network control
information. The pilot tone may be at a lower frequency
4.2.1. Power Detection Methods
[23] than the communications signal or at a higher
Power detection techniques are well suited to such
frequency [24].
problems as amplifier failures. They have been proposed
The RACE project has adopted, as one of its as the basis of failure detection in AONs [28]. In the case
diagnostic signals, a slow amplitude modulation of the of jamming, the power at the receiver would not be
high rate data communications signal. Such a modulation decreased but rather increased. A threshold detector
is a special case of an SCM pilot tone. There are some could detect an overt jamming attack. A sporadic
issues with interference between the data and the pilot jammer may degrade the BER unacceptably without
tones. The experiments for the RACE project have causing a strong enough rise in average received power
indicated that the tone has negligible sensitivity to justify the generation of an alarm, particularly if the
degradation on a 622 Mbit/s NRZ pseudo-random data statistics of the received signal are not very tightly
stream when the pilot frequency tone is below 100 KHz determined. Even if the statistics are tightly determined,
7 of 15the sporadic nature of the attack may not cause statistical the example of the RACE pilot tone, the low rate
anomalies for a long time, while still affecting the very amplitude modulation may be considered as a very slow
low BER that is required (typically 10-11 or less). (with respect to the data rate) averaging. Therefore, if the
communications system relies on low data BER, the
communications signal may be significantly affected
4.2.2. Optical Spectral Analysis Methods
without affecting the detection of the pilot tone. For
An OSA will detect jamming attacks that significantly instance, if 1 percent of the 0s are mapped to 1s by the
affect the received optical spectrum. Some of the uses of introduction of a spurious signal, then a 50 kHz pilot
an OSA may be no different than the uses of a power tone is unlikely to be affected. If, moreover, the jamming
detector, for instance if the OSA is used to detect a signal has the same slow amplitude modulation as the
power surge due to a jammer. The OSA provides more legitimate communications signal, which may be tracked
information than that available from a wideband power if it is sufficiently low frequency, then the introduction
detector but, for jamming through crosstalk, it may not of the jamming signal may not affect the recovery of the
provide much more information than a set of pilot signal. Therefore SCM pilot tones offer more
wavelength-specific power detectors. The main protection against jamming than pilot signals on different
difference may be that the spectrum analyzer may show wavelengths but still allow a range of jamming attacks,
more information than a power detector and may which may be very detrimental to the communications
therefore be more apt to detect changes in spectrum signals. Note that pilot signals may be subject to
shape even when there is not sporadic or pulsed attacks. jamming themselves. Suppose that a pilot tone is not
modulated or is modulated in such a way that a user can
inject a signal, for instance via crosstalk, which will
4.2.3. Pilot Tone Methods
introduce a spurious pilot tone. In that case, raising the
Pilot tones will not be effective in detecting jamming
SNR of the detected pilot tone by addition of a spurios
attacks unless those attacks cover the wavelengths at
signal may mask jamming attacks.
which the pilot tones are carried. Therefore, an attack at
a certain wavelength may not affect a pilot tone at a
different carrier wavelength. Thus, a broadband attack 4.2.4. Optical Time Domain Reflectometry Methods
might be detected by pilot tones at different carrier If there is a wideband jamming attack, then some of
wavelengths than the communication channels, but the jamming signal will be returned in the reflections and
attacks that are bandlimited to the frequencies at which should be observable. Such a diagnostic differs from that
transmission of communications occurs, would not be offered by a pilot tone in that the diagnostic may be done
detected. Even for SCM pilot tones, an attacker may be at the head-end. If there is some modulation on the
able to introduce a jamming signal, which disrupts OTDR probe signal [30], then detection of a jamming
communications without significantly affecting the SCM signal superimposed on the OTDR probe signal may be
pilot signal. If the pilot signal is recovered through a fairly sensitive. In branched networks, such as networks
bandlimiting filter approach, then an attacker need only where wavelengths are demultiplexed onto different
remain outside the passband of that filter. Note that there fibers, different branches may be individually probed by
are certain problems associated with filtering SCM sending different wavelength probe signals [31].
signals. If the pilot tones are embedded in the frequency Therefore, jamming may be detected over different
ranges where transmission occurs, there will be problems branches and its spreading through a branched network
due to poor roll-off of the filters and to splitting the may be traced. A different technique uses filtering of the
bandwidth assigned to a signal. Moreover, unless the ASE by different fiber Bragg gratings (FBGs) on each
pilot tones were hidden or dynamically hopped within branch to generate a probe signal [32]. Such a technique
the transmission band, the attacker would still be able to would not be able to detect jamming if the addition of
avoid the pilot tones when jamming by sending tones at the jamming signal were to occur before the FBGs.
different frequencies from the pilot tone.
The pilot signal may also be recovered by detecting it
from its superposition with the communications signal.
In that case, an attack upon the communications signal
will have an effect upon the recovered pilot signal. The
ability to detect an attack will depend upon the
modulation and the SNR of the pilot tone. There are
many examples of modulation of SCM signals [29]. In
8 of 154.3. Existing Methods Applied to Defend 4.3.3. Pilot Tone Methods
Against an Out-of-Band Jamming Gain competition affects all wavelengths through an
Attack amplifier, although not all wavelengths are equally
affected and there is dependence upon the saturating
4.3.1. Power Detection Methods wavelength. If the pilot signals traverse the same
amplifiers as the communication signals, then the pilot
In the case of gain competition, the received signal
signals should be affected by gain competition when the
power may be decreased. However, certain gain
communication signals are. If the pilot signals are
competition attacks may lead to a severe degradation in
amplified separately, then they will not enable detection
SNR without degradation in total power. Suppose that a
of a gain competition attack.
signal "s" must traverse two EDFAs, A and A. If there
1 2
is gain competition at A, the signal s may not be Even if the pilot tones are amplified in the same
1
adequately amplified. At A, the signal received will amplifiers as the communication channels, the pilot
2
have proportionally more ASE from A than if there had tones may, under certain conditions, not be of use in
1
been no gain competition. With some automatic gain detecting gain competition attacks. For a tone,
control (AGC - a method which maintains A’s output detectability requires a much lower SNR than that
2
power at a specified level), at A, the signal received required to obtain adequate BER on a communication
2
after A may consist disproportionately of ASE from A link. Therefore, the methods used to detect the presence
2 1
superimposed upon ASE from A. Note that if the gain of a pilot tone, for instance to detect a fiber cut, may not
2
of A were fixed (no AGC), the signal output from A be as sensitive to degradation as the methods used to
2 2
would be lower in power than if there had been no gain detect a communications signal. In particular, if there is
competition at A. AGC, then the total power in the band of the pilot tone
1
may be sufficient to mask the occurrence of gain
Another attack combines gain competition with
competition. Let us suppose that a pilot tone suffers from
jamming to thwart power detection techniques. For this
gain competition at amplifier A. If it then passes through
technique to be effective, it does not matter whether or 1
amplifier A with AGC, then the total power received for
not A has automatic gain control. The amplifier A, 2
2 1 the pilot tone signal may be unaffected but the
located before a point of crosstalk jamming such as a
communication signal, as described in the previous
switching fabric, is subject to gain competition. The
section on power detection may be corrupted by ASE.
insertion of a jamming signal through crosstalk after A
1 Even if the modulation and detection of the pilot tone is
replaces the power of the legitimate signal s lost to gain
done in such a manner as to allow detection of attacks
competition. Thus, the power at the input of A would be
2 which may disrupt communications, certain gain
as expected by the network and A would amplify a weak
2 competition attacks may be able to overcome detection
version of s superimposed with a jamming signal and
by a pilot tone. The attack is the same as the one
ASE from A. Such a gain competition followed by
1 described for the power detection case. The gain
jamming scenario can occur if A is a pre-amp in front of
1 competition/jamming combined attack could be used to
a switching fabric, which exhibits crosstalk. Thus,
thwart attempts at detecting gain competition through
power detection techniques may not be satisfactory.
observation of the pilot tone. If the modulation of the
pilot tone is known, then for certain modulations a
4.3.2. Optical Spectral Analysis Methods jammer may introduce a spurious pilot tone via crosstalk
after the occurrence of a gain competition attack.
OSAs may be of use to determine the source of a gain
competition attack, as long as the band that is analyzed
by the OSA is sufficiently large to encompass the carrier 4.3.4. Optical Time Domain Reflectometry Methods
frequency of an out-of-band attack. A particularly
The probing of EDFAs by OTDRs is not similar to the
nefarious attack can occur if the attacker introduces a
probing of fiber lines by OTDRs. If the EDFAs are
signal in the most peaked area of the gain spectrum. An
unidirectional, then they are not useful for amplifying
OSA may be able to show the presence of such an out-
reflected signals and a bi-directional amplifier is
of-band attacker even though power detection on the
required. Therefore, OTDRs will not generally be useful
individual channels will not.
in determining gain competition among signals over a
cascade of EDFAs. If an EDFA is used as a preamplifier
for the OTDR as well as a power amplifier for the
communications system, then gain competition at that
9 of 15EDFA should be detectable over the reflected OTDR 4.4.2. Optical Spectral Analysis Methods
probe. The EDFA probe signal, for the purpose of gain
OSAs will not be able to detect eavesdropping on the
competition detection, then fulfills the same purpose as a
channel that is tapped unless the eavesdropping leads to
pilot tone. The probe signal may be jammed with noise
a disruption of the tapped signal, e.g. a drop in channel
or by insertion of a spurious probe signal, with the same
power or a change in spectrum which is greater than that
class of attacks that may be levied against a pilot signal.
which is allowable under normal operating conditions.
Note that there are certain filtering issues that arise from
Thus, eavesdropping through crosstalk should not cause
the use of in-line EDFAs as pre-amplifiers for OTDRs
an OSA analyzing the tapped signal to detect any
[33].
significant changes. However, as in our discussion of
other detection means, OSAs may be able to detect
4.4. Existing Methods Applied to Defend tapping by observing changes on the tapping channel.
For the OSA to be useful in detecting changes in the
Against a Tapping Attack
tapping channel, there must be some means to determine
that the communication present on the tapping channel is
4.4.1. Power Detection Methods
not legitimate. Such determination is difficult unless the
Power detection techniques have been applied to communications are easily identifiable. For instance,
detection of tapping by detecting the loss of power [34]. using the outputs of several OSAs to compare them for
In [35], the modulation is constrained to on-off keying possible tapping of one channel by another is onerous
with a small modulation index. In [36], the modulation is and difficult.
frequency shift keying. The basis of these types of
security systems is that only an eavesdropper who drains
4.4.3. Pilot Tone Methods
a significant amount of power can perform satisfactory
detection of such a signal. A drain of power sufficiently If pilot tones are detected only for the communications
large to enable an eavesdropper to detect adequately that are supposed to be received, as is the case in current
through tapping is noticed by an attack detection system. systems, then they can provide no protection against
There are many drawbacks to this scheme. It is eavesdropping. Unless the act of tapping the
modulation specific, since it is predicated on on-off communication channel (fiber) causes significant
keying or frequency shift keying. Moreover, by degradation of the signal, then the pilot tone on the
restricting consideration to modulations with a very tapped channel would not be affected.
small modulation index, the legitimate user’s available
data rate is significantly reduced. Finally, the system is
4.4.4. Optical Time Domain Reflectometry Methods
not robust to an attack where a jamming signal is
OTDRs may be used to detect in-line eavesdropping,
inserted after the tapping point. Indeed, a power
which requires some tampering with the fiber. The
detection mechanism would consider the jamming noise
OTDR will detect discontinuities or losses in the fiber
as part of a legitimate untampered signal. In general,
due to the extraction of a portion of the signal for
power detection methods for tapping will not be
eavesdropping. However, as for pilot tones,
adequate on the tapped channel if (1) Tapping does not
eavesdropping which occurs through crosstalk that is
reduce the received power sufficiently to trigger an
legitimately present in the network cannot be reliably
alarm, for instance because the tap is sporadic and very
detected without a search for traces of OTDR probe
short or because the tap drains a very small portion of the
signals on fibers which may be carrying communications
legitimate user's power, or (2) Tapping at the fiber is
tapped from other fibers.
followed by the insertion of a spurious signal to raise the
total received power.
4.5. Summary
Observing the power at the tapping channel through
the fiber crosstalk may enable the attack detection This section has detailed four methods that might be
mechanism to detect an increase in power due to the applied to the attack detection problem for AONs:
presence of the tapped signal. Without any means of wideband power detection, optical spectral analysis, pilot
verifying the source of the added power, however, it may tones, and time domain reflectometry. Each has
be difficult to determine whether the extra power arises strengths and weaknesses with respect to an individual
from greater transmitter power, increased amplification, network architecture and attack methods, and none can
benign effects of crosstalk, etc., or from an attacker. provide protection against each attack method
considered. Particular strengths include the detection of
10 of 15single-location overt jammers by pilot tones, power The general case is shown in Figure 4. Multiple input
detectors, and OSAs, as well as the possibility of OTDRs signals (s…s) enter the device from the left, and exit as
1 n
to detect certain eavesdropping attacks. Limitations output signals (r…r) at the right. The observed device
1 n
include the fact that power detection and OSA could be an optical amplifier within a fiber link or node,
techniques are susceptible to sporadic attacks, and pilot a demultiplexer/switch/multiplexer within a node, or a
tone and OTDR techniques do not protect against star-combiner in a local-area network hub (or other
eavesdropping. combinations of devices from Table 1). The detection
method inserts a tap into both input and output signal
paths, and splits off a known, but negligible portion of
5. A New Method for Detecting
the signal for testing. A delay matching the intrinsic
Attacks Upon All-Optical
delay of the observed device is added to the signal from
Networks the input path tap. The input and output path taps are fed
This section describes a new method for detecting to an optional optical processing unit. Both tapped paths
attacks at optical nodes and within amplified links in are then photodetected, and the result is an electrical
transparent AONs. Transparent networks do not afford a signal that is processed in the electronic processing unit,
single integrity test on either the input or the output of whose output is f(r…r , s…s). The processing attempts
1 n 1 n
any device within the network. Except for simple tests to detect the presence of an attack. The function f
(e.g. total power, the limitations of which were explored measures the operation of the device with respect to
in section 4), no quantitative test can be used for attack some nominal parameters. The value of f determines
detection since the legitimate signal could be modulated whether or not an alarm is generated. Note that this
in any way. However, consideration of device input and technique does not require changing the observed device
output together even for a transparent network can yield in any way, rather it forms a wrapper around the device.
a reasonable test. The new method is based on the It also decouples (to some extent) the security protection
notion that the input and output signals of a device afforded a device from the design and manufacturing of
should have a mathematical relationship that is well the devices itself. The alarm port is assumed to be
known by the network management system that connected to a network management system that can
provisions the service. Therefore, a comparison of the process the alarms from all observed network devices.
input and output signals might be able to detect an attack The remainder of this section presents examples of
if the some function of the signals does not conform to particular implementations of the scheme sketched in
an a priori known set of parameters. Figure 4.
s, ...s Delay D r , ...r 5.1. Amplitude Comparison
1 n 1 m
One of the simplest forms of the idea is shown in
Input tap Device to be tap Output
Figure 5. The idea is to photodetect the signal at the
Signals Observed Signals
input and output ports of the observed device.
Photodetection is a square-law detection process. The
Optical difference between the two photodetector outputs,
Processing possibly adjusted for gain, is therefore the difference in
amplitude of the input and output signal. That difference
is compared against an estimate of what the difference
should be under nominal operation of the device, thus
Electronic
giving an indication of an attacker’s presence. This
Processing
scheme is a short time scale approach (e.g. bit-by-bit) to
f(r , ...r ,s, ...s) determine whether an alarm should be generated. It is
1 m 1 n
Alarm intrinsically different from a statistical test (e.g. power
Port averaging) that were described in section 4.4.1.
Figure 4: New Detection Method
11 of 15As an example, consider the output of the two enclave. The scheme will effectively guard against
detectors where the observed device is an optical attacks sourced from the long haul fiber plant, outside
amplifier. The input and output should differ only by a secured nodes.
multiplicative factor – the amplifier gain (amplifier noise
is added during amplification, but for the moment it is
5.2. Phase and Amplitude Comparison
ignored). Therefore, assuming the delay D is matched to
the amplifier transmission path, and that the gain in the A more sophisticated means to detect attacks is
amplifier following the output photodetector is set to the outlined in Figure 6. Instead of directly photodetecting
inverse of the gain of the observed device, the difference the input and output of the observed device, the outputs
between the two arms should be zero under normal are first optically processed to produce the sample
operation. If an attacker challenges the amplifier with correlation of the input and output signals using an
out-of-band jamming, the arms would become optical delay-and-sum operation. The advantage over
unbalanced and the threshold would be exceeded, the previous method is that a class of attacks that affect
generating an alarm. A very important observation is amplitude and/or phase will be detected, although certain
that the scheme does not depend upon the data rate or combined phase and amplitude attacks will not be
modulation format of the data passing through the detected. The principal disadvantage is that the
observed device. The scheme does require careful amplitude and phase comparator requires more hardware
matching of the path delays to ensure comparison of the than the amplitude comparator.
same section of signal. The exact requirements for
matching are dependent upon the traffics flowing 5.3. Important Detection Issues
through the transparent network.
Though a comprehensive analysis of the detection
The scheme will guard against attacks that affect the scheme is beyond the scope of this paper, some
amplitude of a signal but it provides no information performance related issues merit mentioning. Of
about the phase. Thus, for certain types of modulations particular interest are (1) the detection time necessary to
such as phase shift keying, this method would be unable ferret an attacker, (2) the likelihood that an alarm is
to detect phase only attacks. This scheme will also not generated when no attacker is present (false positive
guard against the possibility that the attacker has direct case), and (3) the likelihood that an attacker eludes the
physical access to the monitor ports - we are in effect detection mechanism while successfully attacking the
assuming that all nodes all repeater/regenerator locations network (false negative case). These three problems are
and security wrappers are enclosed within their own mathematically linked.
secure enclaves. The analysis does not require that the
long haul installed fiber plant be secure, nor does it
require that each terminal location be within a secure
Delay D
Input Device to be Output
Signal Observed Signal
DelayD
Photodetectors Alarm
Port
—
S
Threshold
Compare
+
Figure 5: Amplitude Comparison Form of New Detection Method
12 of 15The detection time for this method is dependent upon threshold at a value higher than the nominal, for this
the optical power received at the photodetectors and the example 10-8 is chosen. For this assumption, detection of
threshold used for the comparison. It is not dependent the attack would require times on the order of hundreds
upon the number of bits received. Because of the of milliseconds to seconds depending upon the
dependence upon optical power, there is a tradeoff confidence required. In contrast, the scheme shown in
among the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the signals on Figure 6 would require on the order of hundreds of
the fiber (and the loss in the observed device), the nanoseconds to microseconds for the same detection
detection time, and the degree of certitude desired to probability, an improvement of about six orders of
assert an attack is underway. magnitude. This improvement gives some confidence
that further development and analysis of similar
False positives and false negatives are metrics that are
algorithms and schemes may well provide the advanced
interwoven by a single threshold selected in the
level of attack detection necessary for tomorrow’s secure
comparator in the electronic processing section. Both
optical networks. This method may be useful in detecting
false positive and false negative results are dependent
a lost quality of service even during sporadic attacks.
upon the SNR, the detection time allowed, the noise
levels in the observed device. For a single tone in-band
jammer having the same relative power as the 6. Discussion and Concluding
communication signals themselves, false positive and Remarks
false negative values can be achieved on the order of the
This final section contains a brief review and
bit-error-rate of the communication signal.
discussion of the limitations of the detection means
considered. Section 2 provided an overview of AONs.
5.4. Impact Section 3 outlined a set of infrastructure vulnerabilities
in AONs that differ in some way from the vulnerabilities
It is reasonable to question the system effectiveness of
in electronic or electro-optic networks. Section 4
such a detection scheme. The most obvious means of
reviewed the possible application of four existing
determining attacks upon a digital communication link is
detection and diagnostic methods to the problem of
to monitor bit error rate, and generate an alarm when the
detecting attacks of the type discussed in section 3.
number of bit errors in a specified interval exceeds a
While each of the four methods reviewed can detect
threshold value. For example, in a SONET link with an
approximate 10-11 bit error rate, and assuming a 1 Gbit/s certain classes of attacks, none can provide protection
against more than one class of fairly simple attacks.
communication link with 20 dB SNR, one means of
Section 5 discussed a new mechanism for attack
deciding that an attack is underway is to set a BER
DelayD
Input Device to be Output
Signal Observed Signal
Delay t Delayt
Alarm
S S
Port
Photodetectors
DelayD
Threshold
Compare
—
S
+
Figure 6: Phase and Amplitude Comparison Detection
13 of 15detection that is applicable to amplified links and optical 7. Acknowledgement
network nodes, and gave two examples of possible
We acknowledge Poompat Saengudomlert's
realizations. The ability to protect unmodified existing
contribution to the analysis on the new attack detection
devices via a wrapper technique is desirable.
mechanism.
While it is possible to provide continually more
advanced means to detect attackers, both technical
References
ability and security budgets will limit what is ultimately
installed in an infrastructure. The most important
challenges include:
(cid:192) Sporadic Jamming, which attempts to disrupt
[1] M. Médard, D. Marquis, R.A. Barry, S.G. Finn,
service but “disappear” before it can be detected.
“Security Issues in All-Optical Networks”, IEEE
Cryptography will solve part of the problem, but Network Magazine, May 1997.
faster attack detection and multipath routing could
[2] D. Marquis, M. Médard, S. G. Finn, R. A. Barry,
provide more significant defenses.
"Physical Security Considerations in All-Optical
(cid:192) Multipoint Attacks, which attempt to thwart Networks", SPIE Proceedings, November 1997, Dallas,
service and to avoid detection methods that Texas.
attempt to localize them. These attacks are
[3] R.A. Barry et al., “All Optical Network Consortium –
potentially much more pernicious if the attackers
Ultrafast TDM Networks”, IEEE Journal on Selected
are well synchronized. Advanced algorithms for
Areas in Communications, vol. 14, no. 5, June 1996, pp
network management systems are one means of 999-1013.
increasing defenses against such serious attacks.
[4] http://www.ll.mit.edu/aon/
(cid:192) Control System and Protocol Attacks, which
[5] C.A. Brackett et al., “A Scaleable Multiwavelength
attempt to confuse the network controlling
Multihop Optical Network: A Proposal for Research on
mechanisms into believing failures exist, usually
All-Optical Networks”, Journal of Lightwave
to provoke reactions that negatively affect the
Technology, vol. 11, no 5/6, June 1993, pp 739.
network services. Sporadic jamming combined
with a protocol attack can become even more [6] http://www.ntonc.org/
problematic if cleartext headers are exploitable by
[7] G.R. Hill, P.J. Chidgey, F. Kaufold, T. Lynch, O. Sahlen,
an attacker.
M. Gustavsson, M. Janson, B. Lagerstron, G. Grasso,
F. Meli, S. Johansson, J. Ingers, L. Fernandez, S. Rotolo,
The new detection scheme presented provides some
A. Antonielli, S. Tebaldini, E. Vezzoni, R. Caddedu, N.
defenses against sporadic jamming, and some defenses
Caponio, F. Testa, A. Scavennec, M.J. O'Mahony, J.
against multipoint attacks assuming an advanced
Zhou, A. Yu, W. Sohler, U. Rust, H. Herrmann, "A
algorithm running in a network management system.
Transport Network Layer Based on Optical Network
This work has not yet considered control or protocol
Elements'', Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 11,
attacks. Future work should include appropriate reaction
no. 5/6, May/June 1993, pp.667-679.
method (e.g. rerouting).
[8] H. Onaka et al., “1.1 Tb/s WDM Transmission over a
The most compelling economic limitation encountered 150 km 1.3 nm Zero Dispersion Single-Mode Fiber”,
may be the cost of retrofitting an inherently insecure Proc. Opt Fiber Conf. (OFC ’96), San Jose, Ca, Feb
infrastructure to make it more secure. While the 1996, Postdeadline paper PD19
methods and means to secure the infrastructure proposed
[9] B. R. Hemenway et. al., "Demonstration of a Reo-
herein are not free, their relatively simple
configurable Wavelength Routed Network at 1.14
implementation, and lack of requirement to change
Tbit/s", OFC 97 Postdeadline Paper PD-26, February
existing AON devices, may make these security
1997.
measures far less expensive than field retrofitting of
nodes and links. [10] R.L Hughes et al., “Quantum Cryptography”,
Contemporary Physics, vol. 36, no. 149, 1995.
[11] A.H. Chan, M. Médard, “Reconfigurable Feedback Shift
Registers”, Proceedings of the 1997 International
Symposium on Information Theory, pg. 178
14 of 15[12] M. Médard, A. H. Chan, J. D. Moores, K. A. Hall, K. A. [26] Y.W. Lai, Y.K. Chen, W.I. Way, "Novel Supervisory
Rauschenbach, S. A. Parikh, "Ultrafast Cryptography Technique Using Wavelength-Division-Multiplexed
Using Optical Logic in Reconfigurable Feedback Shift OTDR in EDFA Repeatered Transmission Systems'',
Registers", SPIE Proceedings, November 1997, Dallas, IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 6, no. 3,
Texas. March 1994, pp.446-451.
[13] W. R. Cheswick, S. M. Bellovin, “Firewalls and Internet [27] Y.-K. Chen. S. Chi, "Fault-Locating and Supervisory
Security”, Addison-Wesley, 1994, ISBN 0-201-63357-4 Technique for Multistaged Branched Optical
Networks'', IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 6,
[14] I. Katzela, G. Ellinas, T.E. Stern, "Fault Diagnosis in
no. 7, July 1994
the Linear Lightwave Network'', LEOS Summer
Topical Meetings, August 7-11, 1995, pp.41-42. [28] N. Schroff, M. Schwartz, "Fault Detection/Identification
in the Linear Lightwave Network", CU/CTR/TR 243-
[15] M.W. Maeda, “Management of WDM Optical
91-24, Columbia University, 1991
Networks”, Optical Fiber Communication Conference
1997 tutorial, February 1997, pp. 141-166. [29] S. Betti, E. Bravi, M. Giaconi, "Analysis of Distortion
Effects in Subcarrier-Multiplexed (SCM) Externally
[16] “IEEE/COMSOC Workshop on WDM Network
Modulated Systems: A Generalized Approach'', IEEE
Management and Control”, June 23, 1996, Dallas,
Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 9, no. 1, January
Texas.
1997, pp.118-120
[17] M. Bischoff, M. H. Huber, O. Jahreis, S.A.F. Derr, F.
[30] M. Sumida, "OTDR Performance Enhancement Using a
Ulm, "Operation and Maintenance for an All Optical
Quaternary FSK Modulated Probe and Coherent
Transport Network", IEEE Communications Magazine,
Detection'', IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 7,
November 1996, pp. 136-142.
no. 3, March 1995, pp.336-338.
[18] C.-S. Li, R. Ramaswami, "Automatic Fault Detection,
[31] F. Yamamoto, I. Sankawa, S. Furukawa, Y. Koyamada,
Isolation and Recovery in Transparent All-Optical
N. Takato, "In-service Remote Access and
networks", Journal of Lightwave Technology, October
Measurement Methods for Passive Double Star
1997, vol 15, no 10, pp 1784-1793.
Networks'', Conference on Optical Hybrid Access
[19] B. Schneier, “Applied cryptography : protocols, Networks, pp.5.02.01-06
algorithms, …”, Wiley, New York, 1994,
[32] C.-K. Chan, F. Tong, L.-K. Chen, J. Song, D. Lam, "A
ISBN:0471597562
Practical Passive Surveillance Scheme for Optically
[20] L.F. Stokes, D. Derickson, "Lightwave Component and Amplified Passive Branched Optical Networks'', IEEE
System Measurements'", Short Course Notes, OFC 97. Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 9, no. 4, April 1997,
pp.526-528
[21] C.-L. Lu, D.J.M. Sabido IX, Perluigi Pogglioni, R.T.
Hofmeister, L.G. Kazovsky, "CORD- A WDMA [33] W.I. Way, Y.W. Lai, Y.K. Chen, "The Effect of
Optical Network: Subcarrier-Based Signaling and Transient Gain Compression in a Saturated EDFA on
Control Scheme'', IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, Optical Time Domain Reflectrometry Testing'', IEEE
vol. 7, no. 5, May 1995, pp.~555--557. Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 6, no. 10, October
1994, pp.1200-1202
[22] B.H. Wang, K.Y. Yen, W.I Way, "Demonstration of
gigabit WDMA systems using parallel processed [34] A.V. Yakovlev, "An Optical-Fiber System for
subcarrier pilot-tone signaling technique'', in OFC'96, Transmitting Confidential Information'',
paper TuE1. Telecommunications and Radio Engineering, (4), 1995.
pp.~1--6
[23] A. Kloch, B. Mikkelsen, K.E. Stubkjaer, "Pilot tones in
WDM networks with wavelength converters'', OFC, [35] R. Erkander, "Optical Fibre Security System ZAT 4'',
1997, TuE6 Ericsson Review, Vol. 67, no. 1, 1986, pp.35-41.
[24] M.J. Minardi, M.A. Ingram, "Adaptive Crosstalk [36] J.H. Bowen, D.L. Baldwin, P.R. Couch, “Secure Fiber
Cancellation and Laser Frequency Drift Compensation Optic Data Transmission System'', United States Patent
in Dense WDM Networks'', Journal of Lightwave no. 4,435,850, March, 1984.
Technology, vol. 13, no. 8, August 1995, pp.~1624--
1635
[25] Guide to OTDR Measurements, Anritsu Wiltron, 1995.
15 of 15